# Understanding the impact of an AI-enabled conversational agent mobile
                    app on users’ mental health and wellbeing with a self-reported maternal
                    event: a mixed method real-world data mHealth study

**Authors:** Becky Inkster, Madhura Kadaba, Vinod Subramanian

**Article IDs:**
- Pmc: PMC10272556
- Doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2023.1084302

**Categories:**
- Global Women's Health

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 02-6-2023
- Collection: 2023

## Abstract

### Background

Maternal mental health care is variable and with limited accessibility.
                        Artificial intelligence (AI) conversational agents (CAs) could potentially
                        play an important role in supporting maternal mental health and wellbeing.
                        Our study examined data from real-world users who self-reported a maternal
                        event while engaging with a digital mental health and wellbeing AI-enabled
                        CA app (Wysa) for emotional support. The study evaluated app effectiveness
                        by comparing changes in self-reported depressive symptoms between a higher
                        engaged group of users and a lower engaged group of users and derived
                        qualitative insights into the behaviors exhibited among higher engaged
                        maternal event users based on their conversations with the AI CA.

### Methods

Real-world anonymised data from users who reported going through a maternal
                        event during their conversation with the app was analyzed. For the first
                        objective, users who completed two PHQ-9 self-reported assessments (
                        n = 51) were grouped as either higher engaged users
                        (n = 28) or lower engaged users (n = 23)
                        based on their number of active session-days with the CA between two
                        screenings. A non-parametric Mann–Whitney test (M–W) and
                        non-parametric Common Language effect size was used to evaluate group
                        differences in self-reported depressive symptoms. For the second objective,
                        a Braun and Clarke thematic analysis was used to identify engagement
                        behavior with the CA for the top quartile of higher engaged users (n = 10
                        of 51). Feedback on the app and demographic information was also explored.

### Results

Results revealed a significant reduction in self-reported depressive symptoms
                        among the higher engaged user group compared to lower engaged user group
                        (M–W p = .004) with a high effect
                        size (CL = 0.736). Furthermore, the top themes that emerged
                        from the qualitative analysis revealed users expressed concerns, hopes, need
                        for support, reframing their thoughts and expressing their victories and
                        gratitude.

### Conclusion

These findings provide preliminary evidence of the effectiveness and
                        engagement and comfort of using this AI-based emotionally intelligent mobile
                        app to support mental health and wellbeing across a range of maternal events
                        and experiences.

## Introduction

Parenthood is a transition that can pose significant challenges to mental and
                physical health across the maternal spectrum, including pre-conception, antenatal
                period, and during or after giving birth (1
                –10).

Perinatal mental health disorders are common (11).
                In the United Kingdom (UK), perinatal mental health problems can affect
                10%–20% of women either during pregnancy or within one year of giving birth
                (12). According to the American Pregnancy
                Association and Postpartum Support International, approximately 70%–80% of
                new mothers experience negative feelings after giving birth (13). For certain demographic groups this is higher, for
                example, up to 60% for adolescent mothers with a low income (14, 15).
                Depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period is associated with multiple
                poor outcomes for parental well-being and childhood development (7, 16–18).

Maternal mental health is a global public health and economic challenge (19–22).
                The estimated accumulated national economic cost of perinatal depression and anxiety
                in the UK is £6.6 billion (11). While
                treatments for maternal mental health care exist, research suggests that
                implementation can be challenging and variable (23
                ).

Technology could play a significant role in addressing barriers to care for maternal
                mental health (24, 25). The acceptability, feasibility and effectiveness of
                perinatal depression digital interventions have been evaluated in various pilot
                studies, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and systematic reviews (26–36).
                While maternal mental health digital technology could help improve accessibility,
                offer timely psychosocial support, as well as potentially improve the quality of
                information being collected, much more research is needed in this area to carefully
                examine its potential benefits vs. its limitations (
                37). A study that published recommendations based on user feedback to inform
                future development of digital maternal mental health support included the proposal
                of adding an Artificial Intelligence (AI) chatbot (
                38). Using dialogue-led personalized tools, AI-based Conversational agents
                (CAs; chatbots) could potentially facilitate effective and safe guided conversations
                and collect information beyond limited survey questions and self-guided sessions.

AI systems using CA have already been developed to provide medical information to
                support child physical health for new mothers (39
                –41). In more recent years, proposals
                have emerged on how AI could play a distinctive digital role in supporting maternal
                mental health and wellbeing (42). A clinical
                trial that randomized women during their birth hospitalization to either
                “chatbot plus treatment as usual” or “treatment as
                usual” (TAU) reported that many participants used the chatbot at least once
                every 2 weeks and that most users reported medium or high satisfaction with the CA
                AI system (43). The authors also reported
                that most participants reported medium or high degrees of therapeutic alliance and
                acceptability (43). Related to these
                findings, an additional RCT publication evaluated the effectiveness of the automated
                CA on changes in symptoms of anxiety and depression. The authors reported that at
                the 6-week postpartum follow-up there were no statistically significant group
                differences between the “chatbot use” or “TAU” (44). A later related publication reported that
                the CA intervention group (“WB001+ TAU”) had a significant reduction
                in depression scores as compared to a TAU-only control group 6-week postpartum after
                birth hospitalization (45).

A pre-pilot development and usability study examining an AI system involving a cohort
                of enrolled Kenyan pregnant women and new mothers reported that most women submitted
                at least three mood ratings, sent at least one message to the AI system and that
                approximately a third of women engaged beyond registration (46). Most AI users reported a positive attitude and
                having trust in using the AI system and that life changes were attributed to using
                it and reported an estimate that using the alpha version of the AI system may have
                improved mood (46).

A different approach using a supervised machine learning CA for perinatal mental
                healthcare was proposed by authors that could be an effective approach for
                monitoring the mental health status of perinatal women in real time while collecting
                user health data. The authors analyzed the 31 characteristics of 223 samples and
                trained a supervised machine learning model to determine the anxiety, depression,
                and hypomania index of perinatal women (47).

While this literature shows some degree of initial promise, much more research is
                required to determine how CA AI systems can safely support maternal mental health
                and hence the motivation to perform our study as a contribution toward furthering
                the understanding AI's potential role in maternal mental health.

In our study, we examine the use of an AI-based emotionally intelligent mobile app
                (“Wysa”) aimed at building mental resilience and promoting mental
                well-being using a text-based CA. Previous studies evaluating Wysa have shown
                significant reductions in depressive symptoms (48
                –50). The conversation-based tools
                and techniques encourage users to manage their anxiety, energy, focus, sleep,
                relaxation, loss, worries, conflicts, and other concerns. Wysa responds to emotions
                that a user expresses and recommends evidence-based self-help tools and techniques
                such as Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT), Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
                (ACT), Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT), motivational interviewing, positive
                behavior support, behavioral reinforcement, mindfulness, and guided micro actions
                that encourage users to build emotional resilience skills.

Our study has two objectives: (1) To examine the effectiveness of Wysa by comparing
                changes in self-reported depressive symptoms between higher vs. lower engaged groups
                (n = 51) involving users that self-reported a
                maternal event, and (2) To perform a qualitative analysis to understand the themes
                being raised for a subset of user messages provided by higher engaged users (
                n = 10). This study also discusses post hoc
                observations, clinical implications, and other research implications derived from
                our study.

## Methods

## Study design and participants

The study duration occurred between February and September, 2019 (pre-pandemic).
                    The participants were initially selected from a pool of real-world users (
                    N = 380,500 users) who used the Wysa app during the
                    study period and who submitted any of the maternal event keywords during their
                    conversation with the CA (n = 5,373).
                    Individuals reported at least once about an ongoing maternal event in response
                    to one of these messages: (1) “Tell me about any recent major changes or
                    events in your life. It could be something stressful or even a good change like
                    moving home or getting a new job.”, (2) “Take a few deep
                    breaths. Tell me the first thought on your mind?”, (3)
                    “I’m here for you. What exactly happened?” (4)
                    “Okay let's talk about that. Go on”, (5) “I understand.
                    Is there more?”. Multiple example screenshots of the Wysa app that match
                    the time period of this study can be found in Supplementary
                    Material S1.

A subgroup of N = 2,037 users (2,037 out of
                    5,373 active users mentioned above) were then grouped into four maternal event
                    categories: Pre-pregnancy, Pregnancy, Perinatal, and Postpartum, which are
                    defined in Table 1. This
                    categorization was used by the researcher for the thematic qualitative analysis
                    (testing Objective 2) to assist in making observations that were categorised
                    into the different maternal event stages (pre-pregnancy and pre-conception,
                    pregnancy, perinatal, postpartum). Furthermore, eligibility (inclusion and
                    exclusion) criteria was applied to determine user enrolment into the study,
                    which is listed in Table 2 and Supplementary Multimedia Appendix A, the
                    latter of which shows the sampling method used for this study.

A final sample of n = 10 users were included in
                    the qualitative analysis. The selection method used a non-probability-based
                    sampling to select 10 users who had an engagement density of greater than 75%.
                    Furthermore, after additional eligibility screening was applied based on the
                    criteria of completing the mental health self-reported depressive symptoms
                    assessment questionnaire at two time points (defined below in the Data Analysis
                    Section “Effectiveness Analysis” section) a final sample size of 
                    n = 51 users were included in the Effectiveness
                    Analysis (testing Objective 1 using a statistical analysis approach).

## Instruments (measures)

The Patient Health Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9) was used to measure self-reported
                    depressive symptoms at baseline and follow-up. This validated self-report
                    questionnaire (51) consists of nine
                    DSM-IV criteria (i.e., questions) and the participant answers (i.e., scores)
                    each of those on a scale from 0 to 3 (“0” = not
                    at all, “1” = several days,
                    “2” = more than half the days,
                    “3” = nearly every day), whereby the severity of
                    depression is measured on the final score aggregated across the questions and
                    range from 0 to 27 points. It is interpreted using these cut-off points: Scoring
                    between 0 and 4 points indicates minimal depression, 5 and 9 points indicates
                    mild depression, 10 and 14 points indicates moderate depression, 15 and 19
                    points indicates moderately severe depression, and 20 or more points indicates
                    severe depression. The PHQ-9 assessments were voluntary, and users were notified
                    once every two weeks.

## Data collection

The app repository was queried for a predefined set of maternal event keywords (Table 3).

Certain keywords were excluded that were considered to induce many false
                    positives within the data (e.g., “born” outside of a
                    maternal-related context, such as “I wish I was never born”).
                    Messages (“user records”) with included keywords were extracted
                    along with the user's app engagement information. The user records were cleared
                    for any inadvertently submitted Personal Identifiable Information (PII) using
                    Wysa's proprietary PII detection and redaction algorithm. The de-identified user
                    records were tagged manually for the maternal event categories. The user records
                    were also tagged for gender: “Female”, or “Male”
                    or “No Tag Available” when gender-related information was not
                    available.

## Data analysis

A mixed-methods quantitative and qualitative approach was used to evaluate our
                    two study objectives on efficacy and engagement, respectively.

## Effectiveness analysis (objective 1)

The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) was used to measure self-reported
                    depressive symptoms at two time points. The sample size was comprised of 51
                    users who completed the PHQ-9 at least two weeks apart but not more than 5 weeks
                    apart, and scored more than 3 in the PHQ-2 (the first 2 questions of the PHQ-9)
                    (51). The self-reported PHQ-2 cut-off was
                    set at >3 (minimum of 4, maximum of 6). The Self-Reported PHQ-9 was set
                    at greater or equal to 5 (minimum of 5, maximum of 27, overall PHQ-9 score of
                    27; see Instruments measures section for more context).

Two comparison groups were identified: (1) a higher engaged user group (n
                    h = 28) and (2) a lower engaged user
                    group (nl = 23), based on
                    the number of “session-days” (the days the users engaged with
                    the CA between the two PHQ-9 screening days).

“Engagement density” is a normalized measure calculated for each
                    user defined as the number of active session-days with the CA in-between the two
                    PHQ-9 assessments divided by the available days between the two screenings.
                    Users whose engagement density was ≥0.4 were grouped as “higher
                    engaged group” and those with engagement density <0.4 were
                    grouped as “lower engaged group”. A 40% engagement density
                    translated to 14 active days of AI-enabled CA sessions over a 35-day period.

The average change in depressive symptoms (first PHQ-9 assessment score minus the
                    second PHQ-9 assessment score) was compared between the higher vs. lower
                    engagement groups. A two-tailed, 5% significance Mann–Whitney test was
                    used to test the statistical significance of the difference in average change of
                    symptoms between the two groups. The effect size was measured using the
                    nonparametric common language effect size (CL) (
                    52, 53).

We further examined the data related to objective 1 to assess the clinically
                    meaningful impact from the quantitative results using the categories defined by
                    the PHQ-9 to discuss the clinical implications.

Furthermore, a post hoc analysis was performed to explore
                    changes in the severity thresholds between the two comparison groups across
                    increasing PHQ-9 severity (at ≥10, 15 and 20 intervals). Depressive
                    symptom reductions were measured for statistical significance (M–W test)
                    and effect size (CL) but not considered as actually significant due to the
                    exploratory, post hoc nature and lack of correction for
                    multiple testing.

## Engagement analysis (objective 2)

A qualitative analysis examined behaviors exhibited by a subset of higher engaged
                    users with maternal events based on their conversations with Wysa. A Braun and
                    Clarke thematic analysis (54, 55) was performed on free-text responses
                    from users (n = 10) who had an engagement
                    density of greater than 75% based on their conversations (i.e., an anonymized
                    sample of 216 free-text conversational snippets) with the AI CA. The main themes
                    and subthemes, derived from the coding and analysis, helped understand users'
                    expectations, experience and engagement. Prevalence of a theme was measured
                    based on number of instances and number of responding users.

## Ethics

Wysa is publicly available as a mobile application (android and iOS). The
                    Conversational Agent (CA) is freely available and has been designed to
                    prioritize safety, privacy and security-by-design. No user registration is
                    required and no Personal Identifiable Information (PII) is asked for during app
                    use. This provides users a private, anonymous space encouraging them to manage
                    their mental well-being in a self-help context (56). All content and tools
                    within the app are reviewed and validated by the Wysa clinical and safety teams.
                    As the study involved analyzing real-world data from an anonymous nonclinical
                    population, it was exempt from registration in a public trial registry
                    (according to OHRP guidelines). Users voluntarily downloaded the app after
                    having consented to the app Terms of Service and Privacy Policy (57, 58). For
                    ethical and privacy reasons, the authors did not have access to all the user
                    messages. Only minimal and limited conversation data at specific chat endpoints
                    were used. The dataset was anonymised by redacting any inadvertent identifiers.
                    User data was adequately secured according to the organization's privacy,
                    security and safety policies. The organization's compliance and privacy officer
                    is author VS who audited the study dataset for safety, privacy and security
                    compliance prior to research use.

## Results

## Effectiveness analysis (objective 1)

The effectiveness statistical analysis was performed to test for group level
                    differences in depressive symptom scoring between high vs. low engagement group
                    of users. The statistical analysis revealed that the high engaged user group
                    showed a significant depressive symptom reduction compared with the lower
                    engaged user group (p = .004) [Figure 1, also refer to Table 4 for more information including a
                    breakdown of PHQ-9 score averages and standard deviations (SD) for each group
                    pre and post timepoints]. The effect size was high (large) (0.736) (also see Table 4), which is roughly
                    equivalent to a high Cohen d (0.89) (52, 53). There was no statistical difference in
                    average PHQ-9 baseline scores between the higher and lower engaged groups. The
                    high engagement group at baseline had a PHQ-9 minimum of 6 and a maximum of 24
                    and at follow-up had a PHQ-9 minimum of 6 and a maximum of 27. The low
                    engagement group at baseline had a PHQ-9 minimum of 9 and a maximum of 24 and at
                    follow-up had a PHQ-9 minimum of 9 and a maximum of 27.

The decrease in PHQ-9 score for the higher engagement group was indicative of a
                    shift in clinical improvement from “moderately severe”
                    depression at baseline into the “moderate depression” category
                    at follow-up (refer to Methods Section about PHQ-9 scoring assessment
                    procedures). There was no clinical shift between scoring categories for the
                    lower engagement group and at both time points the lower engagement group
                    average PHQ-9 scores remained within the “moderately severe
                    depression” range.

## 

As a post hoc analysis, we explored depressive symptom
                    reductions between the groups across increasing PHQ-9 severity. Significant
                    reductions were found among higher engaged users compared to lower engaged users
                    as the severity increased in that the effect was stronger for higher PHQ-9
                    scoring category thresholds indicating the effect was stronger for more severe
                    depression. Depressive symptom reductions were seen with large effect sizes
                    (0.735–0.883) at PHQ-9 ≥ 10, 15 and 20 intervals as can be seen
                    in Figure 2.

## Engagement analysis (objective 2)

We report results derived from qualitative insights into the behaviors exhibited
                    among higher engaged maternal event users (n = 10;
                    engagement density <75%) based on their conversations (an anonymized
                    sample of 216 free-text conversational snippets) with the AI CA. Five main
                    behavioral themes emerged: (1) Concern, (2) Support, (3) Reframe, (4) Hope, and
                    (5) Victory. More detailed information about these themes is reported in Table 5. For the thematic maps of
                    themes and sub-themes, and user messages, please refer to Supplementary Multimedia Appendix B. In brief, some
                    users used the app to explore and express their feelings or concerns, or were
                    more critical of themselves or others, or actively and repeatedly used sleep,
                    relaxation and anxiety related tools or techniques to manage their emotional
                    states, or users completed CBT and reframed their negative thoughts as they
                    shared their small victories and gratitudes during their self-created
                    personalized self-help journey. Notably, none of the users sought help from the
                    CA about their maternal health related matters. This was not an identified theme
                    or sub-theme.

## Additional qualitative observations

These users also provided feedback on sessions within the app with overall
                    sessions seeing 97% of users with high or mid-satisfaction. The user's
                    geographical zone location was derived from the zone related to their
                    smartphone. Participants were mainly located in North America, with a small
                    minority located in Europe. Relationship status was inferred from conversation
                    snippets, which showed that most of the participants (50%) were single and only
                    10% were married.

Stressors experienced by the users were also identified with key concerns being
                    about relationships (100% of users, included marriage, parents, trauma,
                    break-ups), financial distress (60% of users, included worries about savings and
                    money), work (20% of users, work-life balance, coworker discomfort), life (30%
                    of users, including feelings of loneliness, worthlessness, disinterest), and
                    physical health (10% of users, included chronic illness).

## Discussion

Technology's role in supporting mental health and wellbeing is increasingly
                evidenced. Our study adds to this literature showing how an AI-enabled CA can offer
                emotional support for maternal mental health and wellbeing. Given evidence that
                maternal depressive symptoms have increased during the COVID-19 pandemic (59, 60)
                our pre-covid study is important and requires follow-up to validate our preliminary
                findings.

## Principal findings

This study evaluated the effectiveness of an AI-enabled CA-based mental health
                    and wellbeing app on reducing depressive symptoms for users who reported
                    maternal events. We found a significant reduction in self-reported depressive
                    symptoms among the higher engaged user group compared to the lower engaged user
                    group with a high effect size. This reduction in PHQ-9 score for the higher
                    engaged group was indicative of a shift in clinical improvement from
                    “moderately severe depression” to “moderate
                    depression” at follow-up. A post hoc analysis showed
                    that reductions in depressive symptoms were observed across all PHQ-9 severity
                    score thresholds for the higher engaged group, with an observed increasing
                    effect size as severity of symptoms increased.

This study also performed a qualitative analysis to examine user engagement,
                    which revealed five thematic behaviors: Concern, Support, Reframe, Hope and
                    Victory. Some users used the app to explore and express their feelings or
                    concerns. Some were more critical of themselves or others. Some users actively
                    and repeatedly used sleep, relaxation and anxiety related tools or techniques to
                    manage their emotional states. Some users completed CBT and reframed their
                    negative thoughts as they shared their small victories and gratitudes during
                    their self-created personalized self-help journey.

None of the users asked for support for their maternal event or maternal health
                    matters. Instead, users messaged and engaged with the CA about their emotions
                    and the stressors they were experiencing. This could suggest that users were
                    aware of the intended purpose of the well-being app. The overall in-app feedback
                    indicated comfort of using a digital mental health and wellbeing CA for support.

## Comparison with existing literature

We compared our findings with the existing literature focusing on publications
                    that assessed the effectiveness of using CA AI systems for reducing maternal
                    mental health depressive symptoms. Two publications of this type were identified
                    (as this is a nascent research area).

An RCT study (44) was identified that
                    evaluated the effect of an automated CA on postpartum mental health using three
                    questionnaires, including the PHQ-9. The authors reported no significant
                    difference between the “CA intervention group” and the
                    “treatment as usual (TAU) control group” between baseline (after
                    giving birth) and 6 weeks postpartum. That study differed from our study in
                    multiple ways. Our study used a real-world anonymous remote setting approach to
                    enrol users and we included a wide range of maternal events (pre-pregnancy and
                    pre-conception, pregnancy, perinatal, postpartum) whereas the RCT study (44) took place in hospital settings with
                    stringent recruitment eligibility criteria. The studies also differ by control
                    group criteria, study durations, sample size, and differing PHQ-9 cut-off
                    thresholds. The RCT reported low baseline PHQ-9 mean scores (intervention and
                    control group average PHQ-9 scores of 4.6 and 3.3, respectively) and similarly
                    low at 6-week follow-up (intervention and control groups, 3.1 and 3.1,
                    respectively) whereas our study showed much higher group mean PHQ-9 scores (Table 4). It could be possible that
                    differences in study designs, PHQ-9 score severity, and durations of
                    questionnaire assessments are, in part, explaining differences in statistical
                    findings.

Another RCT (45) [which might be closely
                    related to the other RCT (44)] evaluated
                    an automated CA on postpartum mental health using two mental health
                    questionnaires, including the PHQ-9, and reported that the CA intervention group
                    (“WB001+ TAU participants”) had a statistically significant
                    reduction in depressive symptom scores compared to the TAU-only control group
                    between baseline after giving birth and 6 weeks postpartum (45). The RCT reported similarly low PHQ-9 mean scores
                    at baseline and 6-week follow-up (scores below 5). It is not possible to compare
                    our study findings with this publication (45),
                    however, as the methodology used is not described.

To our knowledge these two maternal mental health publications are the only
                    literature currently available for direct comparison of statistical findings on
                    CA AI system effectiveness using the PHQ-9 to assess changes in depressive
                    symptoms. We were unable to compare efficacy with a third study (46) as that pre-pilot study did not include two
                    timepoints for the PHQ-9 for various reasons. For example, the depression
                    screening was too long to administer on a repeating basis, the researchers
                    wanted to avoid frustrating users and distracting them from potential engagement
                    with the intervention (46).

## Clinical implications

For the higher engagement group, the statistically significant decrease in PHQ-9
                    score was indicative of a clinical shift from “moderately severe
                    depression” at baseline into the “moderate depression”
                    category at follow-up. In contrast, for the lower engagement group there was no
                    clinical shift between depressive symptom categories (it remained as
                    “moderately severe depression”). If the higher engagement group
                    used Wysa for a longer duration than two weeks it could be hypothesized that
                    this would further reduce symptomology bringing users “below
                    caseness”, which is defined by NHS IAPT services as being in either
                    “minimal” (PHQ9 score of 0–4) or “mild”
                    (PHQ9 score of 5–9) categories (61
                    ).

Our post hoc observations showing a reduction in depressive
                    symptoms across all PHQ-9 severity score thresholds for the higher engaged group
                    supports a prior meta-analysis, which showed that patients with more severe
                    depression at baseline had at least as much clinical benefit from low intensity
                    interventions as less severely depressed patients, inferring that low intensity
                    interventions could be offered to more severe symptom groups (62).

In clinical settings, AI-enabled CA agents could potentially enhance health
                    information systems to capture the right measurements at the right time and
                    offer the right support in a timely manner, which could help to alleviate the
                    burden of data collection by health-care workers in healthcare settings (63). This technology could also potentially
                    support early detection given that many postnatal depression cases are
                    undiagnosed (30). This is important in
                    low-and middle-income countries (given the lack of trained professionals);
                    however, even in countries where trained professionals are more readily
                    available communication gaps in identifying concerns remain an issue (64), which is where an AI-enabled CA agent
                    facilitate better communication.

There is much potential for using CA-based support for maternal mental health and
                    wellbeing, but this will require more in-depth research and must ensure that
                    safety and privacy protects users, especially given ongoing global events
                    related to reproductive justice (65) and
                    the role of technology companies (66).
                    The mental health and wellbeing CA examined in our study prioritizes privacy and
                    security by design and default. Two recent Mozilla Foundation reports found that
                    reproductive health apps (67) and most
                    digital mental health and wellbeing apps (68)
                    investigated were problematic in terms of data protection and privacy with their
                    report showing that Wysa was only 1 of 2 digital mental health and wellbeing
                    apps to pass their privacy investigation (68
                    ).

In terms of generalizability, users came from 150 global time zones and both
                    android and iOS versions of the app were used. Furthermore, this study included
                    individuals who self-reported experiencing a wide range of maternal events that
                    had an impact on their mental health and wellbeing. This helps to highlight the
                    importance of offering AI-enabled CA support to wider demographics who need
                    emotional support for different reasons with different needs and preferences (48–
                    50).

This study has several limitations. As RCTs are typically regarded as the
                    “gold standard” for evaluating the efficacy of interventions, a
                    lack of controlled settings could lead to non-handling of biases. Our study has
                    no way of knowing whether demographics were balanced across groups (e.g.,
                    diagnoses, other psychological support they might have sought, etc. could impact
                    the analysis). While the PHQ-9 scores are indicative of depressive
                    symptomatology, scores do not confirm or refute the presence of depression. Our
                    study only collected PHQ-9 scores from two time points close together and was
                    not able to follow-up on later outcomes. It did not use other assessments such
                    as EPDS, which could be more appropriate to check concordance and discordance (69). This study used small, unbalanced
                    comparison groups with no use of a treatment-as-usual control group. Users had
                    voluntarily used the app and were likely to have high readiness to explore
                    self-care tools. There may be human bias in labeling data for analysis, such as
                    gender ambiguity, given the app doesn't capture gender for privacy reasons.

Overall, this study demonstrates that an AI-enabled CA-based support can play an
                    important role in reducing depressive symptoms and offering support across
                    diverse maternal events. It adds to a nascent yet growing literature
                    demonstrating the acceptability and comfort of using AI-enabled CA-based digital
                    mental health and wellbeing apps for emotional support.

**Keywords:**
maternal mental health and wellbeing, artificial intelligence, psychotherapy, depression, conversational agent (CA), chatbot

**Funding Sources:**

## References

1. Underwood L, Waldie K, D’Souza S, Peterson ER, Morton S. A review of longitudinal studies on antenatal and postnatal
                    depression. *Arch Womens Ment Health*. 2016;19:711-20. DOI: 10.1007/s00737-016-0629-1. PMID: 27085795.
2. Burns LH. An exploratory study of perceptions of parenting after
                    infertility. *Fam Syst Med*. 1990;8:177-89. DOI: 10.1037/h0089398.
3. Siegel RS, Brandon AR. Adolescents, pregnancy, and mental health. *J
                    Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol*. 2014;27:138-50. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpag.2013.09.008. PMID: 24559618.
4. Zia Y, Mugo N, Ngure K, Odoyo J, Casmir E, Ayiera E. Psychosocial
                    experiences of adolescent girls and young women subsequent to an abortion in
                    sub-saharan Africa and globally: a systematic review. *Front
                    Reprod*. 2021;3:638013-. DOI: 10.3389/frph.2021.638013.
5. Farren J, Mitchell-Jones N, Verbakel JY, Timmerman D, Jalmbrant M, Bourne T. The psychological impact of early pregnancy loss. *Hum Reprod*. 2018;24:731-49. DOI: 10.1093/humupd/dmy025.
6. American Psychological Association. . **. 2012;:-.
7. Dadi AF, Miller ER, Bisetegn TA, Mwanri L. Global burden of antenatal depression and its association with
                    adverse birth outcomes: an umbrella review. *BMC Public
                    Health*. 2020;20:173-. DOI: 10.1186/s12889-020-8293-9. PMID: 32019560.
8. Ogbo FA, Eastwood J, Hendry A, Jalaludin B, Agho KE, Barnett B. Determinants of
                    antenatal depression and postnatal depression in Australia. *BMC
                    Psychiatry*. 2018;18:49-. DOI: 10.1186/s12888-018-1598-x. PMID: 29463221.
9. Lambrenos K, Weindling AM, Calam R, Cox AD. The effect of a child’s disability on mother’s
                    mental health. *Arch Dis Child*. 1996;74:115-20. DOI: 10.1136/adc.74.2.115. PMID: 8660072.
10. Slomian J, Honvo G, Emonts P, Reginster JY, Bruyère O. Consequences of maternal postpartum depression: a systematic
                    review of maternal and infant outcomes. *Womens Health*. 2019;15:1745506519844044-. DOI: 10.1177/1745506519844044.
11. Howard LM, Khalifeh H. Perinatal mental health: a review of progress and challenges. *World Psychiatry*. 2020;19:313-27. DOI: 10.1002/wps.20769. PMID: 32931106.
12. Bauer A, Parsonage M, Knapp M, Iemmi V, Adelaja B. . *The costs of perinatal mental health problems*. 2014;:-. DOI: 10.13140/2.1.4731.6169.
13. American Pregnancy Association. . **. 2019;:-.
14. Earls MF. Committee on psychosocial aspects of child and family health
                    American academy of pediatrics. Incorporating recognition and management of
                    perinatal and postpartum depression into pediatric practice. *Pediatrics*. 2010;126:1032-9. DOI: 10.1542/peds.2010-2348. PMID: 20974776.
15. Earls MF, Yogman MW, Mattson G, Rafferty J. Committee on psychosocial aspects of child and family health.
                    Incorporating recognition and management of perinatal depression into pediatric
                    practice. *Pediatrics*. 2019;143:e20183260-. DOI: 10.1542/peds.2018-3259. PMID: 30559118.
16. Jarde A, Morais M, Kingston D, Giallo R, MacQueen GM, Giglia L. Neonatal
                    outcomes in women with untreated antenatal depression compared with women
                    without depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *JAMA
                    Psychiatry*. 2016;73:826-37. DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.0934. PMID: 27276520.
17. Goodman JH. Perinatal depression and infant mental health. *Arch
                    Psychiatr Nurs*. 2019;33:217-24. DOI: 10.1016/j.apnu.2019.01.010. PMID: 31227073.
18. Lewis AJ, Austin E, Galbally M. Prenatal maternal mental health and fetal growth restriction: a
                    systematic review. *J Dev Orig Health Dis*. 2016;7:416-28. DOI: 10.1017/S2040174416000076. PMID: 26983652.
19. Atif N, Lovell K, Rahman A. Maternal mental health: the missing “m” in the
                    global maternal and child health agenda. *Semin Perinatol*. 2015;39:345-52. DOI: 10.1053/j.semperi.2015.06.007. PMID: 26164538.
20. World Health Organization &
                    United Nations Population Fund. . *Mental health aspects of
                    women’s reproductive health: A global review of the literature*. 2009;:168-.
21. McNab S, Fisher J, Honikman S, Muvhu L, Levine R, Chorwe-Sungani G. Comment: silent
                    burden no more: a global call to action to prioritize perinatal mental health. *BMC Pregnancy Childbirth*. 2022;22:308-. DOI: 10.1186/s12884-022-04645-8. PMID: 35410185.
22. Bauer A, Knapp M, Parsonage M. Lifetime costs of perinatal anxiety and depression. *J Affect Disord*. 2016;192:83-90. DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.12.005. PMID: 26707352.
23. Webb R, Uddin N, Ford E, Easter A, Shakespeare J, Roberts N. Barriers and
                    facilitators to implementing perinatal mental health care in health and social
                    care settings: a systematic review. *Lancet Psychiatry*. 2021;8:521-34. DOI: 10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30467-3. PMID: 33838118.
24. Novick AM, Kwitowski M, Dempsey J, Cooke DL, Dempsey AG. Technology-based approaches for supporting perinatal mental
                    health. *Curr Psychiatry Rep*. 2022;24:419-29. DOI: 10.1007/s11920-022-01349-w. PMID: 35870062.
25. van den Heuvel JF, Groenhof TK, Veerbeek JH, van Solinge WW, Lely AT, Franx A. Ehealth as the
                    next-generation perinatal care: an overview of the literature. *J
                    Med Internet Res*. 2018;20:e202-. DOI: 10.2196/jmir.9262. PMID: 29871855.
26. Heller HM, Hoogendoorn AW, Honig A, Broekman BFP, van Straten A. The effectiveness of a guided internet-based tool for the
                    treatment of depression and anxiety in pregnancy (MamaKits online): randomized
                    controlled trial. *J Med Internet Res*. 2020;22:e15172-. DOI: 10.2196/15172. PMID: 32202505.
27. Haga SM, Drozd F, Lisøy C, Wentzel-Larsen T, Slinning K. Mamma mia—a randomized controlled trial of an
                    internet-based intervention for perinatal depression. *Psychol
                    Med*. 2019;49:1850-8. DOI: 10.1017/S0033291718002544. PMID: 30191779.
28. Shin DC. Development and application of an in-house health care program
                    to improve the physical and mental health of working mothers: a pilot study. *Health Care Women Int*. 2020;41:284-92. DOI: 10.1080/07399332.2019.1621868. PMID: 31259663.
29. Dennis CL, Chung-Lee L. Postpartum depression help-seeking barriers and maternal
                    treatment preferences: a qualitative systematic review. *Birth*. 2006;33:323-31. DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-536X.2006.00130.x. PMID: 17150072.
30. Doherty K, Barry M, Marcano-Belisario J, Arnaud B, Morrison C, Car J. A mobile app for
                    the self-report of psychological well-being during pregnancy (BrightSelf):
                    qualitative design study. *JMIR Ment Health*. 2018;5:e10007-. DOI: 10.2196/10007. PMID: 30482742.
31. Maloni JA, Przeworski A, Damato EG. Web recruitment and internet use and preferences reported by
                    women with postpartum depression after pregnancy complications. *Arch
                    Psychiatr Nurs*. 2013;27:90-5. DOI: 10.1016/j.apnu.2012.12.001. PMID: 23540519.
32. Loughnan SA, Butler C, Sie AA, Grierson AB, Chen AZ, Hobbs MJ. A randomized
                    controlled trial of “MUMentum postnatal”: internet-delivered
                    cognitive behavioural therapy for anxiety and depression in postpartum women. *Behav Res Ther*. 2019;116:94-103. DOI: 10.1016/j.brat.2019.03.001. PMID: 30877878.
33. Forsell E, Bendix M, Holländare F, Szymanska von Schultz B, Nasiell J, Blomdahl-Wetterholm M. Internet
                    delivered cognitive behavior therapy for antenatal depression: a randomized
                    controlled trial. *J Affect Disord*. 2017;221:56-64. DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2017.06.013. PMID: 28628768.
34. Clifton J, Parent J, Seehuus M, Worrall G, Forehand R, Domar A. An internet-based mind/body intervention to mitigate distress
                    in women experiencing infertility: a randomized pilot trial. *PLoS
                    One*. 2020;15:e0229379-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229379. PMID: 32187236.
35. Kim DR, Hantsoo L, Thase ME, Sammel M, Epperson CN. Computer-assisted cognitive behavioral therapy for pregnant
                    women with major depressive disorder. *J Womens Health*. 2014;23:842-8. DOI: 10.1089/jwh.2014.4867.
36. Lee EW, Denison FC, Hor K, Reynolds RM. Web-based interventions for prevention and treatment of
                    perinatal mood disorders: a systematic review. *BMC
                    Pregnancy Childbirth*. 2016;16:1-8. DOI: 10.1186/s12884-016-0831-1. PMID: 26728010.
37. Feldman N, Perret S. Digital mental health for postpartum women: perils, pitfalls,
                    and promise. *NPJ DigitMed*. 2023;6:11-. DOI: 10.1038/s41746-023-00756-4.
38. Moorhead A, Bond R, Mulvenna M, O’Neill S, Murphy N. . **. ;:-.
39. Verduci E, Vizzuso S, Frassinetti A, Mariotti L, Del Torto A, Fiore G. Nutripedia: the
                    fight against the fake news in nutrition during pregnancy and early life. *Nutrients*. 2021;13:2998-. DOI: 10.3390/nu13092998. PMID: 34578875.
40. Chung K, Cho HY, Park JY. A chatbot for perinatal women’s and partners’
                    obstetric and mental health care: development and usability evaluation study. *JMIR Med Inform*. 2021;9:e18607-. DOI: 10.2196/18607. PMID: 33656442.
41. de Barreto ICHC, Barros NBS, Theophilo RL, Viana VF, de Silveira FRV, de Souza O. Development and
                    evaluation of the GISSA mother-baby ChatBot application in promoting child
                    health. *Cien Saude Colet*. 2021;26:1679-90. DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232021265.04072021. PMID: 34076110.
42. Delanerolle G, Yang X, Shetty S, Raymont V, Shetty A, Phiri P. Artificial
                    intelligence: a rapid case for advancement in the personalization of
                    gynaecology/ obstetric and mental health care. *Women’s
                    Health*. 2021;17:1-20. DOI: 10.1177/17455065211018111.
43. Ramachandran M, Suharwardy S, Leonard SA, Gunaseelan A, Robinson A, Darcy A. Acceptability of
                    postnatal mood management through a smartphone-based automated conversational
                    agent. *Am J Obstet Gynecol*. 2020;74:S62-. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2019.11.090.
44. Suharwardy S, Ramachandran M, Leonard SA, Gunaseelan A, Robinson A, Darcy A. 116: effect of
                    an automated conversational agent on postpartum mental health: a randomized,
                    controlled trial. *Am J Obstet Gynecol*. 2020;222:S91-. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2019.11.132.
45. Darcy A, Beaudette A, Chiauzzi E, Daniels J, Goodwin K, Mariano TY. Anatomy of a
                    woebot® (WB001): agent guided CBT for women with postpartum depression. *Expert Rev Med Devices*. 2022;19:287-301. DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2022.2075726. PMID: 35748029.
46. Green EP, Pearson N, Rajasekharan S, Rauws M, Joerin A, Kwobah E. Expanding access
                    to depression treatment in Kenya through automated psychological support:
                    protocol for a single-case experimental design pilot study. *JMIR
                    Res Protoc*. 2019;8:e11800-. DOI: 10.2196/11800. PMID: 31033448.
47. Wang R, Wang J, Liao Y, Wang J. . **. 2020;:378-83. DOI: 10.1109/ICHCI51889.2020.00086.
48. Inkster B, Sarda S, Subramanian V. An empathy-driven, conversational artificial intelligence agent
                    (wysa) for digital mental well-being: real-world data evaluation mixed-methods
                    study. *JMIR Mhealth Uhealth*. 2018;6:e12106-. DOI: 10.2196/12106. PMID: 30470676.
49. Leo AJ, Schuelke MJ, Hunt DM, Metzler JP, Miller JP, Areán PA. Digital mental
                    health intervention for orthopedic patients with symptoms of depression and/or
                    anxiety: pilot feasibility study. *JMIR Form Res*. 2022;6:e34889-. DOI: 10.2196/34889. PMID: 35039278.
50. Leo AJ, Schuelke MJ, Hunt DM, Miller JP, Areán PA, Cheng AL. Digital mental health intervention plus usual care compared
                    with usual care only and usual care plus in-person psychological counseling for
                    orthopedic patients with symptoms of depression or anxiety: cohort study. *JMIR Form Res*. 2022;6:e36203-. DOI: 10.2196/36203. PMID: 35507387.
51. Mitchell AJ, Yadegarfar M, Gill J, Stubbs B. Case finding and screening clinical utility of the patient
                    health questionnaire (PHQ-9 and PHQ-2) for depression in primary care: a
                    diagnostic meta-analysis of 40 studies. *BJPsych Open*. 2016;2:127-38. DOI: 10.1192/bjpo.bp.115.001685. PMID: 27703765.
52. Ruscio J. A probability-based measure of effect size: robustness to base
                    rates and other factors. *Psychol Methods*. 2008;13:19-30. DOI: 10.1037/1082-989X.13.1.19. PMID: 18331151.
53. Rice ME, Harris GT. Comparing effect sizes in follow-up studies: ROC area,
                    Cohen’s d, and r. *Law
                    Hum Behav*. 2005;29:615-20. DOI: 10.1007/s10979-005-6832-7. PMID: 16254746.
54. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. *Qual
                    Res Psychol*. 2006;3:77-101. DOI: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
55. Malik T, Ambrose AJ, Sinha C. Evaluating user feedback for an artificial
                    intelligence-enabled, cognitive behavioral therapy-based mental health app
                    (wysa): qualitative thematic analysis. *JMIR Hum Factors*. 2022;9:e35668-. DOI: 10.2196/35668. PMID: 35249886.
56. Wysa. . **. ;:-.
57. Wysa. . **. ;:-.
58. Wysa. . **. ;:-.
59. Myers S, Emmott EH. Communication across maternal social networks during
                    England’s first national lockdown and its association with postnatal
                    depressive symptoms. *Front Psychol*. 2021;12:648002-. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.648002. PMID: 34045995.
60. Davenport MH, Meyer S, Meah VL, Strynadka MC, Khurana R. Moms are not OK: COVID-19 and maternal mental health. *Front Glob Womens Health*. 2020;1:1-. DOI: 10.3389/fgwh.2020.00001. PMID: 34816146.
61. . . **. ;:-.
62. Bower P, Kontopantelis E, Sutton A, Kendrick T, Richards DA, Gilbody S. Influence of
                    initial severity of depression on effectiveness of low intensity interventions:
                    meta-analysis of individual patient data. *Br Med J*. 2013;346:f540-. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.f540. PMID: 23444423.
63. Brizuela V, Tunçalp Ö. A road to optimizing maternal and newborn quality care
                    measurement for all. *Lancet Glob Health*. 2021;9:e221-2. DOI: 10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30519-2. PMID: 33421366.
64. Boots Family Trust Alliance London. . **. 2013;:-.
65. Shachar C. HIPAA, privacy, and reproductive rights in a post-roe era. *JAMA*. 2022;328:417-8. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2022.12510. PMID: 35838680.
66. Bloomberg. . **. 2022;:-.
67. Mozilla Foundation. . **. ;:-.
68. Mozilla Foundation. . **. 2022;:-.
69. Cox J, Holden J. . *Perinatal mental health: A guide to the Edinburgh postnatal depression
                    scale (EPDS)*. 2003;:-.
