# Indicators for effective visiting primary care services: A case study

**Authors:** Laura J. Healy, Gavin Beccaria, Peter McIlveen

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 36448590
- Pmc: PMC10099463
- Doi: 10.1111/ajr.12946
- Publisher-id: AJR12946
- Other: AJRH-02-2022-0036.R1

**Categories:**
- Original Research
- Special Issue: Co Design

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 30-11-2022
- Ppub: 12-2022

## Abstract

### Objective

The objective of this study was to assess the clinical utility of a model of
                        seven principles for effective visiting primary care services and to
                        determine how it could be conceptualised as a tool for evaluation.

### Setting

The research was undertaken in the context of visiting primary care services
                        with an agency, Outback Futures, selected as a case study.

### Participants

Three executive staff with Outback Futures participated in the research.

### Design

The case study design involved data collection by four group interviews
                        conducted between July and November 2021. The interview data were analysed
                        using thematic analysis.

### Results

This case study is additional evidence for the clinical utility of the model
                        of seven principles. The results reinforce the importance of a
                        community‐focussed approach to assess the impact of visiting service
                        organisations on rural and remote communities. A comprehensive approach to
                        evaluation is required to justify the investments made and safeguard the
                        health and well‐being of rural and remote residents. A
                        self‐assessment protocol has been established from the model for use
                        by visiting services. Furthermore, three themes were drawn from the data: relationship is fundamental, the importance of
                        co‐design, and being effective as a
                        visiting service is challenging.

### Conclusion

The model is appropriate for the case study organisation, and has clinical
                        utility and implications for other visiting services. A
                        self‐assessment protocol has been developed. Future research should
                        apply the model and protocol self‐assessment tool in an effort to
                        construct a consistent and credible approach to evaluation of visiting
                        primary care services.

## INTRODUCTION

Visiting primary care services operate to reduce disparities in access and outcome
                for residents of rural and remote areas.\n1\n, \n2\n There is great variation in the type of
                visiting primary care services in operation, including differences in the type of
                practitioners involved, the organisation's model of service delivery, and the focus
                of interventions (e.g., well‐being, diabetes, specific injuries or
                illnesses, generalised primary care).
                \n3\n Furthermore, literature pertaining to visiting primary care
                services is sparse and inconsistent, particularly that which describes assessment of
                impact or evaluation.\n2\n
                , \n3\n, \n4\n The lack of
                research and models for service evaluation have implications for residents of rural
                and remote areas.

Health services based in communities, whether they be metropolitan or rural in
                location, ideally target their services toward the needs of their respective
                communities. Models for evaluation of the impact of visiting primary care services
                should account for the contextual nuances of rural and remote communities. The model
                of seven principles for effective visiting services\n2\n has potential utility for evaluating
                services. That model was recently revised\n2\n, \n5\n to enhance its credibility. The revised
                model based on a Delphi study is depicted in Figure 1.

Comprehensive definitions of each principle are published elsewhere\n5\n; therefore,
                concise summaries are provided for the current study. 
                Feasibility refers to the funding and expected sustainability of the
                visiting service to continue operating in the select rural and remote region. Justification requires visiting service organisations
                answer the question, “on what grounds are you justified to deliver services
                in X location at Y time?” Example responses could include the health and
                demographic data from residents in the area and statistics of services available on
                the ground. Partnership refers to how well a visiting
                service collaborates and integrates with the communities it services. The process of
                forming a healthy and robust partnership should occur prior to the organisation
                establishing itself in a new region with community consultation as a priority. Scope describes the capacity and specificity of services
                provided by the visiting service and their relation to the needs identified as a
                priority by, and for, the community. Scheduling refers
                to the frequency and duration of visits to a community. 
                Continuity relates to the consistency and reliability of the visiting
                service. Review involves an iterative discussion of
                the effectiveness and appropriateness of clinical and non‐clinical aspects
                of the client and community interaction. Review is likely to combine two components:
                a needs analysis of the community and an evaluation of the service provided.\n5\n The revised
                model provides visiting services a framework for evaluation; however, it is in need
                of critical appraisal by stakeholders in the field. The objective of the present
                study is to assess the clinical utility of the revised model and to determine how it
                can be conceptualised into a tool for evaluation used by visiting service
                organisations.

Case study\n6\n was
                selected as the method to appraise the model and a visiting primary care
                organisation, Outback Futures (OF), was chosen as the case. Outback Futures is a
                not‐for‐profit allied health service based in a capital city,
                Brisbane, Australia. Its team of psychologists, counsellors, speech pathologists,
                occupational therapists and social workers travel to remote and very remote areas of
                Queensland to deliver face‐to‐face services. In between visits,
                clinicians meet with clients for regular sessions conducted by telehealth. Outback
                Futures work with clients across the lifespan in a range of formats including
                individual therapy, professional development, and community presentations.

The research questions guiding the case study were: What is the clinical utility of
                the revised model of seven principles for effective visiting services in the case of
                Outback Futures? And, can the model be conceptualised as a tool for evaluation used
                by visiting primary care services?

## STUDY DESIGN

## Research team and reflexivity

All authors are psychologists registered with the Australian Health Practitioners
                    Registration Authority. The first author receives research funding from the case
                    organisation, Outback Futures, and is interested in improving access to
                    evidence‐based health care services in rural and remote areas. The
                    second and third authors have extensive experience in rural service delivery
                    having worked as FIFO practitioners and have continued research and development
                    in aspects of health and well‐being in regional, rural and remote
                    communities. The first author's pre‐existing relationship with the
                    organisation and potential for bias were managed through weekly supervision with
                    the second and third authors.

## Theoretical framework, orientation and theory

The research deployed Merriam's\n
                    6\n approach to case study design which is grounded in
                    constructivism with its epistemology being that knowledge and meaning are
                    constructed by people through interactions with one another using language and
                    symbols. The method is designed to explore how people make sense of their
                    experiences and the world around them.\n7\n Merriam's\n6\n approach
                    describes a case as a single entity with boundaries defining both the features
                    of the case, and features that are outside the boundaries of the case.\n6\n The first
                    two steps of Merriam's approach are a review of relevant literature and
                    construction of a theoretical framework to guide the enquiry.\n7\n A recent
                    review of the literature pertaining to visiting primary care services was
                    conducted, written up separately, and used to inform the approach of the present
                    study.\n3\n The
                    key findings from that review include concern for the quantity and standard of
                    research pertaining to visiting primary care services. The review's conclusions
                    implore researchers to increase the quality and transparency of studies
                    conducted to enhance the literature and more accurately inform future research,
                    clinical practice, sponsorship and health policy.\n3\n The theoretical framework adopted
                    for the presented study was the revised model of seven principles for effective
                    visiting services.\n2\n
                    , \n5\n The
                    research problem identified for the present study was the disconnection between
                    theory and practice in the assessment and evaluation of visiting primary care
                    services.

## Participant selection

Purposive sampling was used and involved a sample from which the most can be
                    learned to understand and gain insight about the case.\n6\n Outback
                    Futures is a small organisation with nine full‐time equivalent (FTE)
                    clinical staff and 15 FTE non‐clinical staff, including administration
                    and executive staff. Three staff members from the organisation's executive team
                    were selected as appropriate participants to provide insights into both the
                    clinical delivery of services and the current context in the areas they service.
                    Due to the small size of the organisation, no further demographic details are
                    provided to preserve participants' anonymity.

## Data collection

Group interviews are an accepted method in social science and
                    health‐related research to collect in‐depth data and to inform
                    the development of measures, surveys and questionnaires.\n8\n In the
                    current study, data were collected in four 1‐h group interviews with all
                    three participants. The first interview was conducted in person and
                    voice‐recorded for transcription purposes. The remaining three
                    interviews were conducted over videoconference (Zoom) due to COVID‐19
                    lockdown, and the video was recorded. The number of group interviews was
                    determined collaboratively with participants at the time of data collection.
                    Following the fourth interview, sufficient data had been collected in response
                    to each research question, for each of the seven principles of the framework in
                    question (Table 1
                    ).

A semi‐structured interview schedule was developed from the theoretical
                    framework and research questions (Table 1).

Participants were asked to describe what each of the principles meant in practice
                    for the case organisation, and asked to rate how important
                    they believed each principle to be on a 7‐point Likert scale from
                    1 = not at all important to
                    7 = extremely important.

The interview schedule was extended to include the concept of a
                    self‐assessment framework following data collected from the first
                    interview. As such, participants were asked to identify relevant indicators for
                    assessment of each principle in the third and fourth interviews.

A fifth meeting was scheduled to present provisional findings to the participants
                    and allow them an opportunity to clarify or amend. The provisional findings were
                    endorsed with minor amendments to wording of indicators suggested.

## Data coding

The six phases of thematic analysis were used to analyse the data collected.\n9\n The first
                    author became familiar with the data through the process of transcribing each
                    interview, as well as listening to the recordings to generate initial codes.
                    Following this, seven preliminary themes were identified. The transcripts were
                    again reviewed and quotations relating to any of the preliminary themes were
                    extracted. The first author reviewed the preliminary themes in supervision with
                    the second and third authors. The preliminary themes were further condensed into
                    three potential themes. The potential themes were then reviewed and assessed for
                    quality, boundaries, specificity, evidence in the dataset and relationship to
                    other potential themes. Following review and further supervision, three themes
                    were defined and named.

## Ethics approval

This project was approved by the University of Southern Queensland Human Research
                    Ethics Committee (H20REA024).

## ANALYSIS

## Data analysis

Recordings of the group interviews were transcribed by the first author and
                    analysed using Braun and Clarke's
                    \n9\n six‐phase approach to thematic analysis. The six
                    phases include: 1. Familiarising yourself with the data, 2. Generating initial
                    codes, 3. Searching for themes, 4. Reviewing potential themes, 5. Defining and
                    naming themes, and 6. Producing the report.\n9\n The second and third authors
                    provided regular supervision throughout the analysis. Data analysis began
                    throughout the data collection process to inform further interviews, as
                    recommended by Braun and Clarke.\n
                    9\n\n

## FINDINGS

The findings are organised into subsections. The research questions are addressed
                first by summarising the participants' perspectives regarding the seven principles'
                clinical utility and potential for application and an evaluation tool. Then the
                findings of thematic analysis are reported as three themes of importance for the
                delivery of visiting primary care services to rural and remote regions.\n9\n\n

## Clinical utility

The participants were unanimous in their endorsement of the revised model of
                    seven principles for effective visiting services\n5\n (the model). The model's
                    comprehensive approach fit with their organisation.
                        I think all seven [principles] are really critical… We can be
                    measuring clinical outputs and they can be good, but that doesn't mean that
                    we're making any overall change in the whole of community. Our model is about
                    whole of community transformation. (Participant
                    #1)\n
                    \n

Furthermore, the participants reported that each of the seven revised principles
                    held clinical utility for the specific case of Outback Futures, rating them all
                    as either very or extremely
                    important (ratings 6 and 7). Two amendments were suggested to the
                    definitions of principles Partnership and Review. Regarding Partnership, the
                    participant's reported that it is important for visiting services to consult
                    with community prior to establishing themselves, however, they indicated that
                    the process of forming a healthy and robust partnership involves time and
                    consistency. In the case of Outback Futures, the development of rapport with
                    rural and remote communities occurs over a period of at least 2 years.
                    The second suggested amendment was for the definition of Review where the
                    participants requested the inclusion of a strengths analysis of the community,
                    as well as the previously defined needs analysis, to reframe the approach where
                    appropriate.

The participant's emphasised their perspective that OF is different from other
                    visiting services.
                        I think one of the challenging things is that if you're looking at
                    general visiting services, it's actually quite different to Outback
                    Futures… We're one of the few, organisations who offers service
                    provision but is actually focussed on whole of community change… A
                    standard visiting service isn't focussed on community engagement and community
                    mapping, they don't have time for that, they don't have funds for that. (Participant #1)\n
                    
                    \n

The participants reported that they believed that OF is different from other
                    visiting services because of their long‐term commitment to community
                    well‐being. This commitment influences their funding decisions through
                    the diversity of funders, and their workforce structure.
                        The advantage of our workforce model…is the fact that we recruit
                    to a region, so that even when we are not in a community physically, our
                    headspace is in that community… It just means we're more accessible
                    and… there's much greater consistency and reliability in that. (Participant #1)\n
                    
                    \n

Therefore, while the current study demonstrates clinical utility for the model
                    with the case, the results cannot be completely generalised to all visiting
                    services.

## Application to evaluation

During the second interview it was proposed for the model to be transformed into
                    a self‐assessment, accreditation tool. This suggestion was met with
                    support from participants.
                        I think it makes sense from the perspective that there's some consistency
                    like across frameworks that are commonly used in Australia. To me it would be
                    speaking the language of funders potentially as well, like Government bodies
                    that would relate to that [the tool] and that can be helpful. (Participant #1)\n
                    
                    \n
                        I agree with [Participant #2], I think at the moment there could be some
                    real value in trying to get some consistency…whilst it looks daunting at
                    one level, I think there could be some real value in it because I think
                    ultimately, if it's evidence based and it's got some research behind it, it
                    could actually um provide some validation for what we're doing and why we're
                    doing it. (Participant #1)
                    \n
                    \n

The third and fourth interviews were structured to have participants brainstorm
                    potential indicators for the accreditation tool. Each indicator was designed to
                    capture an organisation's consideration of, and adherence to, each principle of
                    the model. Preliminary indicators were proposed in the discussion of the group
                    interviews. These were consolidated and refined by the research team and
                    re‐presented to the participants for review in a follow‐up
                    meeting. The participants expressed support for the preliminary indicators and
                    suggested minor amendments in wording. The final indicators are presented in
                    Table 2.

Throughout the data collection process, four of the seven principles were
                    identified by the participants as mandatory indicating that they were of
                    particular importance, and the remaining principles were classified instead as
                    necessary. Upon review, the participants requested the removal of the mandatory
                    categories. “I feel like maybe you've ended up with seven categories
                    that actually as wholes they're all pretty important” (Participant #2).
                    “That was my feeling yesterday when I read through this, I was a bit
                    concerned about only having four of them as mandatory, the others all felt
                    really important” (Participant #1). The mandatory categories have since
                    been removed.

As an outcome of the current study, the self‐assessment tool has been
                    established and produced into a document for use by visiting service
                    organisations. A preview of the output is captured in Figure 2 with the full text available
                    upon request. To use the self‐assessment measure, visiting service
                    organisations can use each indicator (four or five per principle) and rate their
                    performance on a 6‐point Likert scale presented in Figure 3. Totals can be calculated
                    for each Principle to determine if the organisation requires
                    significant work on a principle or has rated as solid
                    work with areas to improve, or strength with some
                    areas to improve. Organisations are required to provide evidence
                    including specific examples to justify their decision. Graphic designers were
                    used to construct the business‐use document informing both cosmetic and
                    functional features. Of note is the “Smart PDF” features that
                    have been incorporated to allow users to fill the form out electronically. These
                    features make regular review more achievable and allow organisations to capture
                    changes over time.

## Notable themes

## Relationship is fundamental

The participants spoke frequently about the relationship between the visiting
                        service and the community. The participants reported high frequency of staff
                        turnover and inconsistency of services to the remote and very remote regions
                        that OF visits. As a result of turnover and inconsistency, community members
                        are sceptical of visiting services, their commitment and sustainability.
                            I remember when [community member] sat down and said “oh no,
                        not another one, we have had so many of you guys and I can never keep
                        up.” Then 2 years later he was saying “… you
                        guys are the most consistent service providers we've got”…
                        The reality is that when you've got schools with five principals in
                        1 year, and organisations where roles are vacant for 2 years
                        at a time, then they are filled for 6‐month and then they are vacant
                        for another 2 years, if you are persistent, it doesn't take long to
                        show people. (Participant #1)
                        \n
                        \n

The participants also spoke of rural and remote communities feeling
                        invalidated by visiting services that make assumptions of their context and
                        needs. The participants provided examples of how they develop and maintain a
                        relationship with communities.
                            One of the things that we try and drum into our team is that we're
                        not the city experts… We don't come with all the answers. We are
                        here to listen and learn and work with the local context and I think because
                        there is that mindset very strong in the bush of “oh look here's
                        someone else from Brisbane that's come out to show us the latest
                        you‐beaut thing and they'll be gone before we know it and nothing
                        will change”… it's kind of the posture you go with and the
                        way you carry as opposed to just turning up as the latest person with the
                        silver bullet. (Participant #3)
                        \n
                        \n

As well as the approach of the visiting service, the participants reported
                        the continuity of staff and continuity of brand, demonstration of
                        consistency, and direct efforts to connect with local stakeholders as
                        factors that influence the development of relationship. As an outcome of
                        these strategies, the participants reported that once the relationship has
                        been established and the organisation has demonstrated consistency and
                        commitment to the community, the service is able to tailor the frequency of
                        visits without impacting the strength of relationship. Further, the
                        participants reported that a team approach with an existing relationship
                        allows for the movement of staff when required (e.g., maternity leave,
                        promotion to managerial role, or a reallocation to new region) without
                        impact to client's access to services.

## Importance of 
                        co‐design\n

In the case of Outback Futures, co‐design is fundamental to their
                        model of service. The participants explained that the organisation operated
                        purely on an invitation‐only basis.
                            We won't go into a region unless there's been some level of
                        invitation from the community, and that invitation then leads us to do a
                        whole series of community engagement processes to ensure we are actually
                        welcome and that we are doing what they want us to be doing. (Participant #1)\n
                        
                        \n

Once invited to work in a community, OF prioritises partnership through
                        co‐design.
                            Hopefully we carry that posture of humility or partnership or working
                        alongside and listening so that… we are designing stuff together. We
                        use that word ‘co‐design’ a lot. We genuinely try to
                        collaborate and do all of that stuff that's good partnership work. (Participant #3)\n
                        
                        \n
                            I think the coming together of our expertise with the community's
                        expertise is what actually helped identify the priority because sometimes we
                        go, “oh it's obviously going to be around…” whatever
                        “mental health, education or working” they're going,
                        “oh well it's obviously going to be this, because we know our
                        community” but both of those groups actually have blind
                        spots… it's really only as you put them together, and they wrestle
                        together that you actually figure out what the priority is. It's actually a
                        genuine co‐creation of stuff and having the breadth of voices [from
                        the community] is part of the important bit of that… you can get a
                        bit of a biased view dependant on who you listen to. (Participant #3)\n
                        
                        \n

The participants indicated that to be effective in co‐design requires
                        flexibility from the visiting service. Specifically for the case,
                        flexibility in funding sources, scope of practice, and in the structure of
                        their workforce with non‐clinical, community‐focussed roles.
                            I think the diversity of our funding comes back in again because, if
                        you are just funded by Government, then it's only the procured services that
                        are going to be funded and that's going to determine how much you've got to
                        invest time, and money, and resources and into engagement, or into
                        co‐design, or into listening. The fact that we have diversity in our
                        funding means that we have more flexibility to invest in the less
                        service‐orientated aspect of our model. Like the listening and the
                        co‐design. (Participant
                        #1)\n
                        \n
                            They [rural communities] don't realise that, OT once a year is
                        inadequate, until they experience OT once a week. I think it's evolving, and
                        the scope needs to be flexible and needs to evolve. (Participant #1)\n
                        
                        \n
                            Our regional leads and our regional coordinators are
                        actually… they're thinking about the community, they're thinking
                        about connection, they're thinking about our presence there… So,
                        when you elevate it above just pure service delivery and you embed people in
                        the team who constantly have an eye and an ear for what's going on in the
                        community and our reputation there, and our presence there, and our impact
                        there, then um that's important for continuity too because it sort of
                        carries… an overarching understanding of the community that holds
                        that team and its presence in the community together. (Participant #3)\n
                        
                        \n

Co‐design between visiting services and rural and remote communities
                        is essential but does not come without challenges.

## Being effective as a visiting service is challenging

The participants consistently indicated that being an effective visiting
                        service is really challenging. This theme is the broadest of all three
                        themes produces and is related to the previous two separately. Establishing
                        an effective relationship is difficult due to the existing stigma in rural
                        and remote communities and hesitancy to trust visiting services generally.
                        Co‐design is challenging due to mismatched expectations for what the
                        service will provide, logistical challenges of partnership, and scheduling,
                        as well as the difficulty sourcing a well‐rounded, unbiased
                        community opinion rather than an individual viewpoint. Further, both
                        developing a reliable relationship and engaging in co‐design require
                        time and resources that are often not incorporated into funding grants.
                        Outback Futures is a not‐for‐profit organisation and
                        currently operates a no‐fee for service to reduce barriers to
                        engagement. A challenge for the organisation now, having worked in some
                        communities for 5 years, is to introduce a fee to enhance the
                        likelihood of long‐term community engagement with healthcare, beyond
                        visits from OF.
                            Part of our challenge at the moment is looking at how do we build
                        that in as part of the model? So that communities are actually valuing what
                        they're getting, because if whoever‐ whether it's Government, or
                        Outback Futures, or another agency give them [clients] free service for
                        5 years and later on they're forced to pay for it, if they don't
                        value it enough, they won't be prepared to. (Participant #1)\n
                        
                        \n

The participants stated that OF is determined to make a long‐term
                        impact on community well‐being which involves challenges
                        particularly related to funding.
                            …You have never really got a long‐term funding
                        commitment, you've got a long‐term service commitment. So, it does
                        make feasibility really difficult but the organisation has committed to just
                        keep trying to fill those buckets [of different funding]. (Participant #2)\n
                        
                        \n

Another prominent challenge reported by the participants was the high rates
                        of workforce turnover in rural and remote communities, and implications this
                        has for the organisation's justification, partnership and scope.
                            I think that one of the hard things is that because there's so much
                        turnover… keeping on top of who's there, and also keeping on top of
                        exactly what they're doing because part of the justification of what we're
                        doing is because other services aren't doing it. But sometimes they are,
                        sometimes they aren't, because sometimes they can get a speech [speech
                        pathologist] and sometimes they can't, and that can really change with the
                        wind. Sometimes we are doubling up [with other services] and sometimes
                        there's gaping holes. (Participant
                        #2)\n
                        \n
                            Other fly‐in‐fly‐out services or even other
                        services that are on the ground but are servicing 15 schools between Alpha
                        and Birdsville or are servicing seven Central West Shires. The reality is,
                        their head is only in the community that they're in, when they're there
                        physically. Because they're in Winton this week, they're in Boolia next
                        week, they're in Barcoo the next week, actually our capacity to collaborate
                        with them, at any point, is very difficult. (Participant #1)\n
                        
                        \n

Within the organisation, the participants reported there are also logistical
                        challenges related to scheduling clinics, coordinating with community and
                        part‐time staff. Finally, review and evaluation of visiting services
                        is largely uncharted territory.
                            I think any sort of impact stuff is really challenging. Even if at a
                        clinical level it's very hard to get practitioners to use outcome measures
                        well, to select outcome measures that are actually meaningful… it's
                        just hard to get a good read of communities in general. What sort of tools
                        can we use to help us to get to know the full breadth of the community
                        better? Read it better and sort of have an ongoing iterative process around
                        that evaluation so that we're being constantly informed by how that
                        community's feeling and doing. (Participant
                        #2)\n
                        \n

## DISCUSSION

The current research provides evidence for the clinical utility of the revised model
                of seven principles for effective visiting services (the model).\n2\n, \n5\n A pragmatic
                outcome of the current research is a self‐assessment tool for the case
                organisation to use as a tool for evaluation. This is an innovative contribution to
                the literature relating to visiting primary care services, also informing the area
                of clinical practice.

In the case of Outback Futures, the model received unanimous endorsement by the case
                study's participants. The participants reported that the comprehensive approach
                aligned well with their target of improving whole of community wellbeing.\n10\n The
                participants requested minor amendments to the existing published definitions of the
                principles Partnership and Review. Further, the participants reported that the case
                of Outback Futures is not representative of typical visiting services. This belief
                may have risen from the discrepancy between different community's expectations and
                OF's success with relationships and co‐design. One of the many advantages of
                the OF's model is their availability to both community members and other service
                providers. By recruiting to a region, their staff are more available to meet with,
                and discuss matters relating to that region, even when not on the ground in person.
                Further, the multimodal approach with both face‐to‐face and
                telehealth interventions also contributes to the continuity of the service. Due to
                the perceived difference between OF and other visiting services, future research is
                required to determine the suitability of the model of seven principles to other
                visiting primary care organisations.

Currently, no guidelines, standard procedures or recommendations exist to direct the
                evidence‐based evaluation of visiting primary care services. The product of
                the present study is the first known attempt to establish a tool for evaluation to
                be used by visiting services. Following the support collected for the model, the
                case of Outback Futures was used to inform the development of the
                self‐assessment tool presented in Table 2. While currently this measure
                is specific to the case, it provides a prototype that could be replicated and
                modified by other services. Due to the variation in visiting primary care services,
                a framework centred on the model provides a consistent solution to be adaptably
                applied to different organisations.

Three themes were identified from the data collected, and illustrated different
                components of effective visiting service delivery from the perspective of the case.

## Relationship

The participants explained how the relationship between the visiting service and
                    community is fundamental to the effectiveness of the organisation. They reported
                    that the health workforce in the areas OF visit have high rates of staff
                    turnover and difficulties in the attraction and retention of staff which aligns
                    with evidence relating to workforce challenges in rural and remote areas.\n4\n, \n11\n, \n12\n These
                    findings from the case organisation are further support for the revised model,
                    particularly the principles of partnership and scheduling which emphasise
                    collaboration with communities serviced.\n5\n In addition to existing literature,
                    the present study implores visiting services to prioritise their relationship
                    with community members by adopting a stance of humility to listen and learn the
                    local context, and demonstrating reliability through continuity of staff and
                    continuity of visits.

## Co‐design

The development of a robust relationship can be further enhanced through
                    collaborative co‐design. This finding aligns with the conclusions of The
                    Orange Declaration on Rural and Remote Mental Health.\n10\n The Orange
                    Declaration is a publication that described ten problems related to current
                    models of mental health and well‐being in rural areas, and proposed ten
                    solutions. In relation to the present research, the Orange Declaration outlined
                    the problem of urban assumptions and their influence through top‐down
                    service models, as well as the discrepancy between service provision and
                    population need in rural locations. Solutions proposed by the Orange Declaration
                    include service models tailored to the context of individual communities, and
                    co‐designed, bottom‐up processes to generate appropriate
                    solutions.\n10\n
                    The process of co‐design encourages an increase in capacity,
                    empowerment, resilience and connection as individuals are asked to provide their
                    perspective as experts of their own community and culture.\n10\n, \n13\n For
                    co‐design to be effective, visiting services must have flexibility to
                    tailor their service to the needs and plans discussed. For Outback Futures, this
                    flexibility is found in the diversity of their funding sources that allows them
                    to continue to prioritise community engagement and co‐design beyond
                    specific grants allocated only to the delivery of services. Co‐design is
                    a vital component of the effectiveness of Outback Futures as a visiting service.

## Challenge

From the perspective of the case, being effective as a visiting service
                    organisation is challenging. It is challenging because of the stigma that has
                    developed around visiting services and work required to build trust and rapport.
                    It is challenging because being genuine and committed to co‐design
                    requires time, resources and flexibility. It is challenging because the
                    literature related to visiting services is sparse and inconsistent and because
                    OF feels different from the typical mould of visiting services. It is
                    challenging because OF's commitment to communities extend beyond what they can
                    grasp in funding, and because valued components of their service are not often
                    included in funding grants (i.e., co‐design). Further challenges include
                    the turnover of workforce in rural and remote areas\n4\n, \n11\n, \n12\n and the impact this has on the
                    organisation's justification, partnership and scope; internal team logistics
                    scheduling clinics and responding to need. It is challenging to review the
                    service in an evidence‐based and meaningful way. The challenges reported
                    have not been published in literature relating to visiting services, and could
                    serve as an explanation for the state of the literature, being sparse and
                    inconsistent. This clinical experience is a valuable contribution to the
                    research literature.

## Conclusions and recommendations

This case study provides support for the clinical utility of the revised model of
                    seven principles for effective visiting services, and includes a prototype
                    self‐assessment tool. The themes identified indicate that the posture
                    adopted by visiting services in rural and remote communities is critical to
                    their effectiveness. It is recommended that visiting services invest sincerely
                    in their relationship with each community, prioritise co‐design, and
                    adapt their service to the unique needs of the individual communities. The case
                    acknowledges the challenges this involves but indicates the output is of great
                    value to rural and remote residents. A limitation to the application of the
                    prototype self‐assessment tool is its development with reference to a
                    single case. The case study represents a valuable contribution to the
                    literature; however, further research is required to assess both the clinical
                    utility of the revised model and the applicability of the prototype
                    self‐assessment tool to other visiting service organisations. The
                    self‐assessment tool should remain as a prototype until further
                    assessment has been conducted.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

LJH: conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; methodology; project
                administration; visualization; writing – original draft; writing –
                review and editing. GB: conceptualization; methodology; supervision; writing
                – review and editing. PM: conceptualization; methodology; supervision;
                writing – review and editing.

## FUNDING INFORMATION

This research has been supported by funding from Outback Futures and the University
                of Southern Queensland through the Postgraduate Research Scholarship.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST

LH has worked for Outback Futures since 2013 in varying roles. One of the three
                participants was an existing connection of LH. Regular supervision from GB and PM
                was maintained throughout the research to ensure that any biases from LH were
                identified and eliminated.

## ETHICAL APPROVAL

This project was approved by the University of Southern Queensland Human Research
                Ethics Committee (H20REA024).

**Keywords:**
evaluation, health, outreach, remote, rural

**Funding Sources:**
  - Award ID: Contributor to USQ Postgraduate Research Scholarsh
- Institution: University of Southern Queensland\n
  - Institution ID: 10.13039/501100001795
  - Award ID: Postgraduate Research Scholarship

## References

1. de
                    Roodenbeke E, Lucas S, Rouzaut A, Bana F. Outreach
                    services as a strategy to increase access to health workers in remote and rural
                    areas. Geneva: World
                    Health Organization; 2011.
2. Carey TA, Sirett D, Wakerman J, Russell D, Humphreys JS. What
                    principles should guide visiting primary health care services in rural and
                    remote communities? Lessons from a systematic review. *Aust
                    J Rural Health*. 2018;26:146-56. PMID: 29845693.
3. Healy LJ, Beccaria G, Daken K, McIlveen P.. Visiting
                    primary care services: A systematic quantitative literature review. **. 2022;:-.
4. Carey TA, Sirett D, Russell D, Humphreys JS, Wakerman J. What
                    is the overall impact or effectiveness of visiting primary health care services
                    in rural and remote communities in high‐income countries? A systematic
                    review. *BMC Health Serv Res*. 2018;18:476-. PMID: 29921271.
5. Healy LJ, Beccaria G, McIlveen P. Revised
                    model for evaluating visiting health care services in rural and remote settings. *Aust J Rural Health*. 2021;29:779-88. PMID: 34490938.
6. Merriam SB. Qualitative
                    research and case study applications in education. San
                    Francisco, CA: Jossey‐Bass; 1998.
7. Yazan B. Three
                    approaches to case study methods in education: yin, Merriam, and stake. *Qual Rep*. 2015;20:134-52.
8. . The SAGE
                    handbook of qualitative methods in Health Research. London: SAGE; 2010.
9. Braun V, Clarke V. Thematic
                    analysis. APA handbook of research methods in psychology, Vol 2: research
                    designs: quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological. Washington,
                    DC: American Psychological Association; 2012.
10. Perkins D, Farmer J, Salvador‐Carulla L, Dalton H, Luscombe G. The Orange declaration on rural and remote mental health. *Aust J Rural Health*. 2019;27:374-9. PMID: 31515882.
11. World Health Organization. Increasing
                    access to heath workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention
                    2010. **. ;:-.
12. Jackson
                    Pulver L, Fitzpatrick S, Ritchie J, Norrie M. Filling
                    the Gap: an evaluation of a voluntary dental program within an Aboriginal and
                    Torres Strait Islander and Torres Strait islander community controlled primary
                    health service. *Aborig Isl Health Work J*. 2010;34:3-7.
13. Steen M, Manschot M, De Koning N. Benefits
                    of co‐design in service design projects. *Int J
                    Des*. 2011;5:53-60.
