# Hemofiltration in sepsis: where do we go from here?

**Authors:** John A Kellum, Rinaldo Bellomo

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 11094495
- Pmc: PMC137329
- Publisher-id: cc659
- Doi: 10.1186/cc659

**Categories:**
- Commentary

**Publication Dates:**
- Ppub: 2000
- Epub: 16-2-2000

## Abstract

Hemofiltration as an adjunct to therapy for sepsis is now 10 years\t\t\t old.
                    Despite early successes and significant theoretical advantages, the\t\t\t
                    treatment remains experimental. Although feasibility has been established,\t\t\t
                    efficacy has proved to be much more difficult. Clinical as well as
                    technical\t\t\t difficulties remain important considerations to future studies.
                    These issues\t\t\t are discussed and the brief history of hemofiltration in
                    sepsis is\t\t\t reviewed.

## Full text

A decade has past since Stein et al [
                1]\t\t first described an improvement in hemodynamics associated with
                hemofiltration\t\t in the pig after the administration of intravenous endotoxin. A
                short time\t\t later these findings were confirmed by Grootendorst et al
                [2], who also found that the ultrafiltrate
                removed from\t\t endotoxemic animals produced hemodynamic instability in healthy
                animals when it\t\t was infused intravenously [3].
                Around this time, Lee\t\t et al [4]
                reported a survival benefit associated\t\t with hemofiltration in septic pigs, and
                Bellomo et al [5] showed that
                some of the interleukins and tumor necrosis\t\t factor could be removed from the
                circulation of humans with sepsis. With these\t\t advances, blood purification as a
                treatment for human septic shock was born.\t\t Despite its promising start, however,
                hemofiltration as a treatment for sepsis\t\t has been slow to mature.

There are numerous reasons for this stunted growth. First, several\t\t pharmacologic
                agents are more effective than hemofiltration in reducing serum\t\t cytokine
                activity, and yet none have been shown to produce a survival benefit.\t\t Indeed,
                several spectacular failures have occurred as a result of attempts to\t\t modulate
                the inflammatory response in sepsis, occasionally even resulting in\t\t increased
                mortality [6]. Another reason is that 10
                years\t\t ago our concepts of sepsis were different. Sepsis was viewed as a
                condition in\t\t which the local inflammatory response had become generalized and
                uncontrolled.\t\t Immune effector cells, especially neutrophils, possess potent
                cytotoxic\t\t capacity, and when unchecked this response can cause significant
                tissue injury.\t\t More recently, however, we have come to appreciate that although
                this is true,\t\t sepsis is also a syndrome of immune suppression. Immune effector
                cells become\t\t dysfunctional and are no longer capable of normal immune
                surveillance. Such a\t\t condition results in increased susceptibility to recurrent
                infection, prolonged\t\t inflammation, and continued tissue injury. Therapy aimed at
                reducing the\t\t inflammatory response by removing some of the proinflammatory
                stimuli may not\t\t restore immunologic balance, and thus may not improve outcome.
                Finally, sepsis\t\t may not be a form of intravascular inflammation as originally
                thought, but\t\t rather may be a disseminated local inflammation in which the actual
                process\t\t occurs at the tissue level, and that which appears in the circulation is
                only\t\t the 'spill-over'.

For these reasons, the ideal immune-modulating strategy would be one\t\t that
                restores immunologic stability, rather than blindly inhibiting or\t\t stimulating
                one or another component. Such a strategy would counter the\t\t immunologic
                instability of sepsis, perhaps by reducing the activity of a wide\t\t array of both
                proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory molecules. Such a strategy\t\t would
                'autoregulate' itself, such that as one component of the\t\t response increased, so
                too would the effect on that component. Finally, the\t\t ideal strategy might well
                be limited in its effect to the circulating pool of\t\t mediators, rather than
                influencing the tissue levels where their activity may\t\t be beneficial. In theory,
                hemofiltration fulfills this ideal paradigm. Indeed,\t\t hemofiltration is perhaps
                the only available treatment strategy that can, in\t\t theory, achieve all of these
                goals.

Technical considerations must also be taken into account when\t\t assessing the
                current performance as well as the potential of blood\t\t purification therapies in
                sepsis. Not all hemofiltration modalities are the\t\t same. Continuous venovenous
                hemofiltration (CVVH) at 2 l/h of plasma water\t\t exchange is very different from
                continuous venovenous hemodialysis (CVVHD) with\t\t pure diffusive clearance when it
                comes to middle molecular clearance [7,8]. Adding 500 ml/h convective clearance will
                also yield a very\t\t different pattern of blood purification and very different
                effects. Clinicians\t\t need to understand that these 'technical' differences matter
                a\t\t great deal. Current membranes also differ very much from one another in
                their\t\t adsorptive capacity for mediators (ie not all membranes are created
                equal)\t\t [9]. Importantly, even with optimal
                membranes and\t\t convective clearance at 2 l/h we may be operating at inadequate
                levels of blood\t\t purification to meet the goal of restoring immune balance during
                severe sepsis.\t\t High-volume hemofiltration may be necessary to achieve degrees of
                blood\t\t purification that can make a predictable clinical difference [10]. Furthermore, cytokine clearance is still
                suboptimal with\t\t current membranes, and higher porosity devices need to be
                tested. If one uses\t\t plasmafilters to overcome the problem of limited porosity,
                one has to deal with\t\t the extraordinary logistics of continuous plasma exchange.
                Even when such\t\t problems are overcome for 48 h [
                11], the results are not\t\t impressive, possibly because clearances remain
                relatively low (20-30 ml/min).\t\t Presently, the cost of such plasma exchange
                therapy is also prohibitive. The\t\t use of plasmafiltration with sorbent technology
                may be another cost-effective\t\t and efficacious way of approaching this problem.
                Such coupled\t\t filtration-adsorption appears to restore in vitro
                monocyte\t\t responsiveness to endotoxin and to remove cytokines with high
                efficiency [12]. Thus, quite apart from
                conceptual issues of whether blood\t\t purification is a rational approach to sepsis
                treatment, there are major\t\t technical matters that need to be properly addressed
                if we truly wish to test\t\t the hypothesis that blood purification has a role as
                adjunctive management in\t\t sepsis.

In addition, testing this hypothesis will require the development of\t\t better tools
                to accurately assess the impact of 'broad-spectrum'\t\t immunomodulation on the
                inflammatory response. Sepsis and multiorgan failure\t\t are complex syndromes and
                the determinants of mortality in patients suffering\t\t from these syndromes are
                usually multifactorial. Very large randomized trials,\t\t perhaps enrolling
                thousands of patients, will be necessary to establish the\t\t efficacy of any
                therapy. Before these trials are established, however, it is\t\t necessary to
                understand whether hemofiltration has the capacity to affect the\t\t immune status
                of patients in beneficial ways. The first few steps in this\t\t process have already
                been achieved. Hemofiltration can remove a wide array of\t\t inflammatory mediators
                from the circulation [13,14]. To date, more than 30 studies have shown
                that cytokines\t\t and other small soluble molecules can be removed using this
                technique, although\t\t the size of the effects and the mechanisms (sieving versus
                adsorption) are\t\t still in question. Next, it has been established in both humans
                [8] and animals [15] that hemofiltration\t\t can alter the circulating
                concentrations of some mediators. The next logical\t\t step is to determine whether
                these alterations in the plasma produce beneficial\t\t effects on immune effector
                cells.

The study by Toft et al [16]
                in a\t\t recent issue of Critical Care is the first attempt to
                investigate the\t\t effects of hemofiltration on the activation status of
                leukocytes. The authors\t\t examined a panel of adhesion molecules, including CD11b,
                on the surface of\t\t granulocytes and lymphocytes, in order to assess their
                activation status, but\t\t were unable to find any effects of hemofiltration, save
                for the uncertain\t\t finding that the percentage of CD3+ T cells
                increased over time.\t\t Unfortunately, their study design is reminiscent of many
                earlier studies, which\t\t also failed to show any important immunologic effects of
                hemofiltration. First,\t\t and most importantly, the study is uncontrolled. The
                immune status of patients\t\t with sepsis is not static. The activation status of
                leukocytes, like the\t\t circulating level of any given inflammatory mediator,
                varies with time. Without\t\t controlling for the effects of time, we cannot expect
                to discover what effect,\t\t if any, hemofiltration exerts on the immune status of
                the patient. Secondly,\t\t Toft et al used a less than ideal form
                of therapy. Although they did\t\t use AN69 membranes, they used CVVHD (actually
                continuous venovenous\t\t hemodiafiltration with very low-dose ultrafiltration).
                Because most of the\t\t mediators of inflammation are not removed to a significant
                degree, if at all,\t\t by diffusion, it is not surprising that this study was
                negative. Finally, even\t\t if the study had been controlled, the small sample size
                would make the study\t\t very difficult to interpret. Baseline heterogeneity was
                large for most of the\t\t key variables and therefore it would be difficult to
                compare individual\t\t patients. Thus, although Toft et al [16] set\t\t out in the right direction, their
                methods were inadequate to answer the\t\t important questions they were attempting
                to address.

It is hoped that future studies will not repeat the mistakes of the\t\t past.
                Hemofiltration may one day have a place in the management of sepsis and\t\t
                multiorgan failure. Then again it may not. The only way to tell will be to\t\t
                conduct carefully controlled studies designed to evaluate the effects of this\t\t
                therapy on immune effector cell function. If these studies prove that\t\t
                hemofiltration has the potential to be useful, as suggested by animal\t\t
                experiments, then large randomized studies comparing survival will be\t\t warranted.
                Even before this point is reached, however, clinicians who care for\t\t critically
                ill patients with sepsis and renal failure will need to decide\t\t whether
                hemofiltration or hemodialysis is the most appropriate therapy. This\t\t decision
                has traditionally been made on the basis of the hemodynamic stability\t\t of the
                patient. The results of the study by Toft et al [16], which albeit was small and uncontrolled,
                suggest that\t\t immunologic stability should also be considered. Although the study
                failed to\t\t show any change in immunologic status with CVVHD, other studies [17,18]
                have shown adverse immune\t\t consequences of intermittent hemodialysis. Studies
                that compare intermittent\t\t with continuous therapies are urgently needed, in
                hemodynamically stable\t\t patients, in order to understand what effects these
                therapies may have on\t\t immune function.

**Keywords:**
continuous venovenous hemodialysis, continuous venovenous hemofiltration, hemofiltration, multiple-organ failure, sepsis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome

## References

1. Stein B, Pfenninger E, Grunert A, Deller A. Influence of continuous haemofiltration on haemodynamics and
                        central\t\t\t blood voulume in experimental endotoxic shock.. *Intens Care Med*. 1990;16:494-499.
2. Grootendorst AF, van Bommel EF, van der Hoven B, van Leengoed LA, van Osta AL. High volume hemofiltration improves right ventrictular function
                        in\t\t\t endotoxin-induced shock in the pig.. *Intens Care Med*. 1992;18:235-240.
3. Grootendorst AF, van Bommel EF, van Leengoed LA. Infusion of ultrafiltrate from endotoxemic pigs depresses
                        myocardial\t\t\t performance in normal pigs.. *J Crit Care*. 1993;8:161-169. PMID: 8275161.
4. Lee PA, Matson JR, Pryor RW, Hinshaw LB. Continuous arteriovenous hemofiltration therapy for\t\t\t Staphylococcus
                        aureus-induced septicemia in immature swine.. *Crit Care Med*. 1993;21:914-. PMID: 8504662.
5. Bellomo R, Tipping P, Boyce N. Continuous veno-venous hemofiltration with dialysis removes\t\t\t
                        cytokines from the circulation of septic patients.. *Crit Care Med*. 1993;21:522-526. PMID: 8472571.
6. Fisher CJ, Agosti JM, Opal SM. Treatment of septic shock with the tumor necrosis factor
                        receptor:Fc\t\t\t fusion protein.. *N Engl J Med*. 1996;334:1697-1702. PMID: 8637514.
7. van Hamersvelt HW, Eggenhuizen E, Hejinis G, van Prooijen S, Huysman FTh. Convective and diffusive clearance of large molecules
                        during\t\t\t continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration [abstract].. *J Am Soc Nephrol*. 1999;10:198A-.
8. Kellum JA, Johnson JP, Kramer D. Diffusive versus convective therapy: effects on mediators
                        of\t\t\t inflammation in patients with severe systemic inflammatory
                        response\t\t\t syndrome.. *Crit Care Med*. 1998;26:1995-2000. PMID: 9875910.
9. Lonneman G, Koch KM, Shaldon S, Dinarello CA. Studies on the ability of hemodialysis membranes to induce, bind
                        and\t\t\t clear human interleukin-1.. *L Lab Clin Med*. 1988;112:76-86.
10. Bellomo R, Bladwin I, Cole L, Ronco C. Preliminary experience with high volume hemofiltration in
                        human\t\t\t septic shock.. *Kidney Int*. 1998;53 (suppl 66):S182-S185.
11. Reeves J, Butt WW, Shann F. Continuous plasmafiltration in sepsis syndrome.. *Crit Care Med*. 1999;27:2096-2104. PMID: 10548188.
12. Tetta C, Bellomo R, Brendolan A. Use of adsorptive mechanisms in continuous renal
                        replacement\t\t\t therapies in the critically ill.. *Kidney Int*. 1999;56 (suppl 72):S15-S19.
13. Kellum JA. Immunomodulation in sepsis the role of hemofiltration.. *Minerva Anesthesiol*. 1999;65:410-418.
14. Bellomo R. Continuous hemofiltration as blood purification in sepsis.. *New Horizons*. 1995;3:732-737. PMID: 8574604.
15. Bellomo R, Kellum JA, Gandhi C, Pinsky MR. The effect of intensive plasma water exchange by hemofiltration
                        on\t\t\t hemodynamics and soluble mediates in canine endotoxemia.. *Am J Respir Crit Care Med*. 2000;:-. PMID: 10806135.
16. Toft P, Kehler D, Brandslund I, Tonnsen E. The immunological effects of continued veno-venous\t\t\t
                        haemodiafiltration in critically ill patients.. *Crit Care*. 1999;3:159-165. PMID: 11056741.
17. Alkhunaizi AM, Schrier RW. Management of acute renal failure: new prospectives.. *Am J Kidney Dis*. 1996;28:315-328. PMID: 8804228.
18. Braun N. Expression of adhesion molecules and activation markers on\t\t\t
                        lymphocytes and monocytes during hemofiltration.. *Blood Purif*. 1997;15:61-76. PMID: 9087813.
