# Using Team-Based Learning to Teach Pharmacology within the Medical
        Curriculum

**Authors:** Nora L. D. Luitjes, Gisela J. van der Velden, Rahul Pandit, Conxita Mestres

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 38921967
- Pmc: PMC11207375
- Doi: 10.3390/pharmacy12030091
- Publisher-id: pharmacy-12-00091

**Categories:**
- Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 12-6-2024
- Collection: 6-2024

## Abstract

## 1. Introduction

The primary goal of pharmacology teaching within the undergraduate medical curriculum
                is to prepare medical students to prescribe medications both safely and efficiently.
                Failure to achieve this goal can lead to medication errors, thereby increasing
                patient morbidity and mortality rates [1]. It is in fact known that inadequacies in the
                undergraduate curriculum can lead to medication errors [2]. Students are known to
                struggle with pharmacology, as the subject requires integration of knowledge from
                various other disciplines such as physiology and pathophysiology [3]. As every patient requires
                a different approach, understanding the deeper concepts of pharmacology is essential
                for addressing clinical problems, especially when there are no protocols for
                specific situations.

To ensure optimal training of medical students, the Utrecht University Medical School
                in The Netherlands has integrated pharmacology learning throughout various thematic
                courses within the three-year bachelor’s curriculum (pharmacology
                longitudinal thread). In these courses, Pharmacology is taught together with other
                subjects such as physiology, anatomy, biochemistry and pathology [4]. The majority of the
                teaching hours devoted to pharmacology are, however, taught in large groups
                (>100 students) with limited teacher–student and
                student–student interaction. In a recent evaluation of the curriculum,
                students expressed their appreciation for pharmacology education, but students admit
                to attending these classes unprepared, resulting in passive learning [4]. Although lectures can be
                an excellent way to explain difficult concepts, they can also give a false notion of
                grasping the subject matter [5].
                This can be potentially harmful within the medical context. Although prescribing
                guidelines are accessible and commonly used by physicians, such guidelines do not
                necessarily include all clinical scenarios, thereby requiring physicians to possess
                the knowledge and skills to make exceptions or compare diverse clinical protocols
                when prescribing medications. Translating this to medical education, it is important
                that students gain a deeper understanding of pharmacological concepts and can apply
                them in a variety of situations.

Interestingly, even though students following active learning may feel they learn
                less, their performance is often better [5]. The replacement of passive acceptance and repetition
                of knowledge with active engagement, not only with peers but also with the subject
                matter itself, improves students’ performance in exams [6,7].

## 1.1. The Concept and Biology of Active Learning

According to Kyriacou and Marshall (1989), active learning is “a quality
                    of the pupils’ mental experience in which there is active intellectual
                    involvement in the learning experience characterized by increased
                    insight” [6].
                    The process of memorizing learning material relies on the learning,
                    consolidation, and reconsolidation of knowledge [8]. When new knowledge is
                    introduced, the protein synthesis involved in the biochemical storage of memory
                    is rather unstable. During the process of memory consolidation, a memory
                    converts into a more stable and resilient form and will transfer from the
                    hippocampus to the neocortex [9].
                    Additionally, memory reconsolidation involves actively recalling previously
                    consolidated knowledge, resulting in highly stable and easily retrievable
                    information [10]. To
                    achieve successful learning outcomes, students need to actively engage in both
                    cognitive and metacognitive processes [8].

## 1.2. Team-Based Learning as a Form of Active Learning in Medical Education

There are numerous pedagogical strategies to provoke active learning, of which
                    team-based learning (TBL) is one [11,
                    12]. TBL was developed by Professor Michaelson in 1979 as a means to
                    improve teaching for larger class sizes [11]. Since then, TBL has been used worldwide in
                    multiple disciplines, mostly in health sciences [8,11], and it contributes
                    to critical thinking and effective collaboration [13,14,15]. TBL provides
                    students with individual work, collaborative teamwork, and immediate feedback to
                    actively assess their conceptual understanding. These activities are conducted
                    by students in small groups, with one instructor with expertise in the content
                    overseeing the entire class [
                    11]. Learning through TBL is an active process and based on the
                    reconstruction of knowledge. To experience knowledge, students must actively
                    apply the knowledge in an authentic problem [16,
                    17]. TBL is based on six steps from superficial cognitive learning to
                    deeper cognitive learning, following the six categories of Bloom’s
                    taxonomy: knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and
                    evaluation [18].
                    Briefly, in the first step of TBL, students complete a preparatory assignment.
                    This step is followed by the individual readiness assurance test (iRAT), which
                    consists of a set of multiple-choice questions to test individual knowledge.
                    Following this, students answer the same set of questions but as a team, via the
                    team-readiness assurance test (tRAT). In the fourth step, the instructor
                    clarifies any topics students find challenging. In the fifth step, teams solve
                    an authentic clinical problem as a group. Finally, in the last step, students
                    reflect and evaluate their learning experience [11].

The TBL-approach is based on the constructivist learning theory, which emphasizes
                    the importance of experiential learning to achieve long-term integration of new
                    knowledge [13]. The
                    constructivist learning theory is based on four principles. First, the
                    student’s learning is the primary focus. To optimize this process, the
                    learning environment should provide the student with adequate challenges to
                    stimulate the student’s knowledge uptake [17]. Second, students are
                    encouraged to actively interact with the study material through problem solving
                    cases. As a result, students can apply their knowledge to get a deeper
                    understanding of the subject matter as it encourages the reconsolidation of
                    knowledge, which is essential for long-term retention [8]. Third, teamwork is an
                    essential component of the TBL-approach as this collaborative learning
                    stimulates new experiences with knowledge, leading to new insights. Lastly,
                    reflection plays a crucial role in the TBL approach. This reflection includes
                    both strengths and weaknesses of their learning experiences which can be applied
                    or improved in future learning processes [13,
                    16].

There are many elements in TBL which could contribute to its success, but there
                    is no unanimous consensus in the elements of TBL that are considered crucial.
                    Some authors underpin the importance of carefully formed and managed teams,
                    frequent and timely feedback, problem solving, and student peer evaluation [12]. Others have
                    identified competitiveness between the groups as an important factor [19]. However, these
                    recommendations are based on the experiences of teachers, and explicit research
                    has not been conducted to understand the individual importance of the various
                    components of TBL. The educational literature, however, shows that several
                    elements of TBL, such as formative assessment, immediate feedback and teamwork,
                    could be contributing factors [
                    20].

## 1.3. Understanding Team-Based Learning in Our Context

Based on literature, TBL could be a valuable addition to the teaching of
                    pharmacology within our medical curriculum. As teaching is contextual [21], educational
                    practices successfully implemented at one institution do not necessarily have to
                    be equally successful in other institutions. Institutional differences in the
                    use of TBL can be attributed to social and cultural influences, and student
                    openness to teaching methods [
                    22]. Changing the entire pharmacology curriculum to incorporate TBL is
                    time-consuming and costly. Therefore, it is important to first understand the
                    strengths, weaknesses and effectiveness of TBL within our educational context.

The goal of the current study is to understand the effectiveness of TBL as an
                    educational tool for teaching pharmacology to first-year medical students at
                    Utrecht University Medical School. In the current study, a modified TBL approach
                    was used to teach cardiovascular pharmacology, where the six stages of TBL were
                    applied. First, we investigated how students perceived the various components of
                    TBL as a teaching/learning methodology. As preference for a teaching method does
                    not have to necessarily translate to improved performance [5], as a second goal, we
                    investigated the effects of TBL on student performance in the final exam of the
                    course.

## 2. Materials and Methods

## 2.1. Study Setting

The study was conducted during the academic years 2021–2022 and
                    2022–2023 at Utrecht University Medical School. The medical program at
                    Utrecht University is structured into a three-year bachelor’s and a
                    subsequent three-year master’s degree program. TBL was implemented
                    within a first-year bachelor’s course focused on cardiovascular
                    diseases. The course is offered at the end of the academic year.

The course on cardiovascular diseases comprised five weeks, during which students
                    were exposed to various groups of cardiovascular diseases, their characteristics
                    and their treatment. Pharmacological aspects within this course were divided
                    into lectures (no prior preparation was required), self-study (independent
                    preparation with books and guiding questions), and a TBL session (see Section 2.3.
                    Procedure for more details). Figure
                    1 provides a detailed structure of the course.

For all students, passing the course on cardiovascular diseases is obligatory to
                    proceed to the second year of the bachelor’s degree in medicine. The
                    course consists of plenary lectures (±300 students), interactive
                    lectures (48–150 students), practical studies, and small-group teaching
                    (25 students). While attendance for all lectures, whether plenary or
                    interactive, is optional, students are required to participate in at least 80%
                    of the small-group teaching sessions. TBL was originally designed for large
                    groups [11]; however,
                    in our experience, larger group sizes result in lower levels of interaction
                    between the students and between the instructor and students. To ensure
                    sufficient interaction during the TBL session, a group size with a maximum of 48
                    students was chosen. A single instructor (2021–2022) and two instructors
                    (2022–2023) were involved in teaching all TBL sessions on cardiovascular
                    pharmacology. The TBL session was offered in the format of an interactive
                    lecture and was likewise considered optional for attendance.

## 2.2. Study Population

During the academic years of 2021–2022 (n =
                    348) and 2022–2023 (n = 338), a total of
                    686 medical students were enrolled in the first-year course on cardiovascular
                    diseases at Utrecht University Medical School and subsequently completed the
                    final exam at the end of week 5 (Figure 1). As all students had the possibility to
                    follow the TBL session, two distinct groups were formed for data collection: TBL
                    attendees (n = 196) and non-TBL attendees (n = 490). In 2021–2022, 84 students (31.8% of
                    the cohort) opted to follow TBL education, and in 2022–2023 there were
                    112 students (33.1% of the cohort). The TBL session was non-obligatory (see Section 2.4.,
                    Statistical Analysis, for more details), and all students received the same
                    number of credits if they met the attendance criteria for the course and passed
                    the final exam.

## 2.3. Procedure

Within the framework of the course, the TBL session comprised a structured
                    sequence of six steps followed by step seven, the final exam [11,12], (Figure 2). Educational
                    tips published previously were used to develop the teaching materials. In Section 4.1.
                    Limitations, the strengths and weaknesses of the study approach are discussed in
                    detail. Except for step 1 of TBL (participation) and step 7 (final exam), all
                    other steps of the study procedure were completed during the TBL session lasting
                    1 h 45 min.

The TBL steps were as follows:
                        
                            Preparation: Two preparatory lectures delved into the pharmacological
                    aspects of antianginal, antithrombotic, and antiarrhythmic drugs. Additionally,
                    as preparation for TBL following these lectures, a preparatory study assignment
                    was provided on heart failure medications. All educational activities were
                    optional, with attendance prior to the TBL session left unrecorded. The
                    preparatory study assignments were accessible for all students and included
                    readings. The non-TBL group also had access to the same reading materials, and
                    the slides of the TBL session were shared following the classes.
                        
                        
                            Individual readiness assurance test (iRAT): PScribe, an electronic
                    prescribing system was used for the iRAT. The iRAT consisted of seven questions
                    covering all pharmacological topics of the course. Individual scores were
                    recorded, which additionally served to note participation (attendance). The iRAT
                    questions were closed-ended and were a mix of single and multiple correct
                    answers for 2021–2022 and single correct answers for 2022–2023.
                    For questions with multiple correct answers, a part of the full score was
                    awarded for partially correct answers. Questions were at the level of
                    understanding, applying or analyzing, according to Bloom’s taxonomy.
                        
                        
                            Team readiness assurance test (tRAT): For the tRAT, students in
                    groups discussed the same questions as during the iRAT and had to come to an
                    agreement on the correct answers to the questions. This step differed from the
                    traditional tRAT, as teams were not predefined, the tRAT scores were not
                    formally registered, and the element of competition was not used in our setting.
                    The reasons for the latter are two: we wanted to favor a low threshold for
                    initiating discussion and engagement, and we also wanted to minimize
                    administrative burden.
                        
                        
                            Instructor clarification: topics considered complex by students were
                    discussed with the entire class and clarified by the instructor.
                        
                        
                            Team application: Students engaged in a collaborative problem-solving
                    exercise involving a clinical case. For this, students were shown a patient
                    video, followed by a set of questions, which students had to answer in groups.
                        
                        
                            Feedback questionnaire: With the help of the online audience response
                    system Wooclap, feedback on the TBL session on cardiovascular pharmacology was
                    gathered through an anonymous digital questionnaire immediately at the end of
                    the TBL session. The questionnaire comprised eight statements where students had
                    to express their level of (dis)agreement on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly
                    disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree and 5 = strongly agree). These
                    statements were divided into two categories: (1) students’ own
                    perception on knowledge and (2) feedback on using TBL as a learning method.
                    Participation in the questionnaire via Wooclap was voluntary. There was no
                    incentive provided to participate.
                        
                        
                            Final exam: All students (TBL attendees and non-TBL attendees) took
                    the final exam for the course on cardiovascular diseases via the digital
                    examination platform Testvision. In the final exam, the content on
                    cardiovascular pharmacology was assessed through seven questions in
                    2021–2022 and eight questions in 2022–2023. Closed-ended
                    questions with single or multiple correct answers were used for this purpose.
                    Similar to the iRAT, for questions with multiple correct answers, partially
                    correct answers were rewarded with a part of the full score. Additionally, here,
                    questions were at the level of understanding, applying or analyzing, according
                    to Bloom’s taxonomy.

## 2.4. Statistical Analysis

Based on the research objectives, different approaches were undertaken to analyze
                    the data. To understand students’ perception of TBL as a learning
                    method, data from the online Wooclap questionnaire were analyzed. The 5-point
                    Likert scale data were used as ordinal variables, and the mean and median were
                    determined. To evaluate the efficacy of TBL as a teaching methodology, three
                    sets of pre-defined comparisons were performed. Initially, the
                    Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was applied to check for normality of
                    distribution, showing that the numerical variables exhibited differing
                    distribution patterns. The statistical approach per research question was as
                    follows:
                        
                            The impact of TBL on students’ understanding of the subject
                    matter was investigated by comparing final exam scores between TBL attendees and
                    non-attendees, using the Mann–Whitney U test. Median scores are reported
                    in percentages of correct answers.
                        
                        
                            The TBL attendees’ individual performance in the final exam
                    was examined by comparing their iRAT scores and final exam scores using the
                    Mann–Whitney U test. Median scores are reported in percentages of
                    correct answers.
                        
                        
                            The correlation between iRAT scores and exam scores, to understand
                    whether the performance in the former correlated with performance in the latter,
                    was explored using Spearman’s correlation coefficient.
                        
                        
                            The difficulty index of the individual questions (p-value) of both the iRAT and the final
                    examination was analyzed to understand whether a possible disparity in the level
                    of difficulty could explain the differences in student performance. The p-value for questions for one correct
                    answer indicates the proportion of students who correctly answered the question.
                    For questions with multiple possible answers or open-ended questions, the p-value indicates the proportion of the
                    points obtained by students for a particular question [23]. In both
                    cases, p-values range from 0 to 1, with easier
                    items resulting in higher p-values. Differences
                    between the p-values (iRAT vs. final exam) were
                    tested using the Mann–Whitney U test.

The threshold for statistical significance was determined as a p-value lower than 0.05. Statistical analyses were
                    conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 29.0, and graphical representations
                    were generated using GraphPad Prism Version 10.1.1.

## 2.5. Ethical Approval

Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the Dutch Association for
                    Medical Education Ethical Review Board (NVMO: 2022.6.2). Permission was provided
                    to use iRAT scores from the online platform Pscribe and individual student
                    scores only on pharmacology questions of the final exam and to anonymously
                    obtain feedback on the TBL session. For this reason, no data were collected on
                    the student characteristics (e.g., age, number of times repeating the course) as
                    this would infringe upon the privacy of the students, and access to this
                    sensitive information was not needed for the goal of the study. Data that were
                    non-anonymous were first coded and subsequently analyzed.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Student Perception Regarding Team-Based Learning

In 2021–2022 and 2022–2023, a total of 196 students who attended
                    the TBL sessions were invited to participate in the questionnaire, of whom 143
                    (73%) filled it in. All participants completed the entire questionnaire. The
                    Cronbach’s alpha value for the entire questionnaire confirmed that the
                    questionnaire reached high reliability (8 items; Cronbach α = 0.821).

The findings of the questionnaire are summarized in Table 1. In general,
                    students highly valued both the organization and the content of the TBL session.
                    Additionally, students were highly positive about two essential elements of TBL:
                    collaborating with peers to solve problems and using formative assessment.
                    Similarly, the use of a patient video as a part of the clinical case study was
                    appreciated by students. Interestingly, although students had the feeling that
                    the TBL session helped them in achieving the learning goals, students did not
                    feel confident about their knowledge. The statement ‘I think I have
                    sufficient knowledge on this subject.’, scored the lowest, with a mean
                    of 3.2 on the 5-point Likert scale.

## 3.2. Student Performance with Team-Based Learning versus No Team-Based
                    Learning

In 2021–2022 and 2022–2023, the average median score on the
                    pharmacology-related final exam questions for TBL attendees (median (IQR) =
                    77.14 (67.64–83.29) and 78.22 (65.39–88.22), respectively) was
                    higher compared to non-attendees (median (IQR) = 62.43 (50.54–73.79) and
                    66.61 (54.50–79.19), respectively). These differences were statistically
                    significant (U = 6452.50, p < 0.001 for
                    2021–2022; U = 8445.00, p < 0.001
                    for 2022–2023). TBL attendees had significantly higher mean ranks
                    (2021–2022: 229.68; 2022–2023: 207.10) compared to non-attendees
                    (2021–2022: 156.94; 2022–2023: 150.87) (Figure 3a).

## 3.3. The iRAT Scores versus the Final Exam Scores

In 2021–2022 and 2022–2023, the median score on the
                    pharmacology-related final exam questions (median (IQR) = 77.14
                    (67.64–83.29) and 78.22 (65.39–88.22), respectively) was higher
                    compared to the average iRAT score (median (IQR) = 40.25 (24.05–54.73)
                    and 42.86 (28.57–57.14), respectively). Significant improvement in exam
                    performance over the course was evident among the TBL attendees (U = 696.00; p < 0.001 for 2021–2022; U = 2024.00; p < 0.001 for 2022–2023). The
                    pharmacology-related final exam questions had significantly higher mean ranks
                    (2021–2022: 118.21; 2022–2023: 150.43) compared to the iRAT
                    scores (2021–2022: 50.79; 2022–2023: 74.57) (Figure 3b).

## 3.4. The Relationship between Individual Results during the iRAT and the
                    Final Exam

A Spearman’s rank-order correlation was performed to determine the
                    relationship between individual results during the iRAT and the final exam. A
                    disparity in performance between TBL attendees and non-TBL attendees underscores
                    the significance of TBL in facilitating knowledge application and
                    problem-solving skills essential for success in pharmacology examinations. For
                    both academic years, the correlations were found to not be significant
                    (2021–2022 (rs(82) = 0.089, p = 0.423) and
                    2022–2023 (rs(110) = 0.005, p = 0.956).

## 3.5. The Difficulty Index (p-Value) of the iRAT and Final Examination
                    Questions

In 2021–2022 and 2022–2023, the average p-values
                    of the iRAT (median (IQR) = 0.42 (0.24–0.53) and 0.43
                    (0.30–0.55), respectively) were lower compared to the final examination
                    (median (IQR) = 0.63 (0.58–0.77) and 0.70 (0.49–0.74),
                    respectively). These differences were statistically significant (U = 7.00, p = 0.025 for 2021–2022; U = 10.00, p = 0.021 for 2022–2023). The iRAT questions
                    had significantly lower mean ranks (2021–2022: 5.00; 2022–2023:
                    5.75) compared to the final examination questions (2021–2022: 10.00;
                    2022–2023: 11.25).

## 4. Discussion

Student perceptions of TBL indicate overall appreciation for TBL as a teaching
                methodology. Students appreciate the structured format, the organizational quality,
                and the informative content of the TBL session. Furthermore, students express that
                the TBL session aided in achieving the learning objectives and contributed to their
                pharmacological knowledge. However, it is noteworthy that students express only
                moderate confidence in their pharmacological knowledge after participating in the
                TBL session, as indicated by the mean score of 3.2 on the 5-point Likert scale. This
                observation is not surprising, given the complexity of clinical problems discussed
                during the TBL session, which might give students the perception that their
                knowledge is insufficient. This implies that although students may find TBL engaging
                and beneficial, additional efforts might be necessary to increase their confidence
                in independently applying pharmacological concepts. In future, score assessments and
                open-ended questions could enrich the feedback received, although increasing the
                length of the questionnaire could lead to lower responses [23].

Interestingly, despite the moderate confidence levels, TBL had a significantly
                positive impact on student performance on the pharmacology-related final exam
                questions. TBL attendees outperformed non-attendees, with notable differences in
                final exam scores. This underscores the efficacy of TBL in enhancing
                students’ comprehension and retention of pharmacological concepts. Moreover,
                the study revealed a substantial academic advantage associated with participation in
                TBL. Not only did students who followed TBL perform better in the final exam
                compared to students who did not follow TBL, the individual performance within the
                TBL group also improved. The mean final exam scores on the pharmacology-related
                questions were significantly higher than the mean iRAT scores. These results are
                consistent across both academic years 2021–2022 and 2022–2023,
                indicating a consistent effect of TBL and suggesting that TBL increases
                students’ uptake of pharmacology knowledge. Interestingly, although the
                difficulty index of the questions of the final exam was lower compared to the iRAT,
                non-TBL attendees still scored lower than TBL attendees.

It is striking that student performance in the iRAT was moderate to low (around 40%),
                implying that students have below-average initial knowledge. The higher difficulty
                index and the poor performance of students in the iRAT could be explained by the
                fact that the iRAT was a formative assessment. It is known that formative exams
                often result in low scores as passing these exams is not obligatory, a phenomenon
                also observed in our students [24].
                Despite this, the iRAT signals possible knowledge gaps and stimulates
                problem-solving skills. In line with this, it is important to mention that the
                placement of the TBL session prior to the exam could have resulted in an added
                advantage of revisiting and revising topics before the final exam.

No statistically significant correlation was found between the iRAT scores and the
                pharmacology-related questions on the final exam. The considerable disparity in
                performance between TBL attendees and non-TBL attendees highlights the value of TBL
                in facilitating knowledge application and problem-solving skills essential for
                success in pharmacology examinations. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy to highlight
                that not all students scored higher on the pharmacology-related final exam question
                than on the iRAT. Given that the iRAT score did not directly impact the academic
                outcome of the student, one plausible explanation for the diminished performance on
                the final exam could be attributed to examination-related stress leading to
                suboptimal academic performance [
                25].

## 4.1. Implications of Results for Pharmacology Educators

TBL as an active learning methodology: This work aims to encourage educators to
                    implement TBL as an engaging and effective teaching strategy that could be
                    implemented for teaching pharmacology. The findings in this study support the
                    substantial value of TBL as an effective means of stimulating active learning in
                    pharmacology education. This aligns with earlier studies in other medical
                    contexts in which TBL was used to teach pharmacology, providing additional
                    evidence of its effectiveness [
                    26,27,28]. TBL sessions can
                    serve two purposes: firstly, they provide students with a ‘reality
                    check’ or immediate feedback on their level of knowledge and the depth
                    one requires to solve presented clinical problems. This is also reflected in the
                    evaluation of the TBL session, where students indicated a low level of
                    confidence on the subject matter, possibly stimulating them to study more for
                    the exam. Secondly, discussing the iRAT questions and clinical problems during
                    the TBL session promotes deeper understanding of the subject material, preparing
                    students for solving complex clinical problems. Students who did not attend the
                    TBL session missed this opportunity. Although these students had access to the
                    materials, they did miss the interaction and the in-depth discussion, both
                    crucial elements of in-depth learning.

Placement of TBL sessions within the curriculum: TBL, as it incorporates elements
                    such as formative testing, feedback and solving authentic clinical problems,
                    could be an ideal educational tool for revising topics prior to exams. These
                    elements of TBL could help students to discover their knowledge deficits and to
                    optimally prepare themselves to solve clinical cases. This could be especially
                    helpful in institutions where frequent and standard TBL sessions cannot be
                    arranged due to varying restrictions.

Modifications in TBL approach might be essential to fit educational different
                    contexts. Modifications in TBL needed to fit the educational context should be
                    evidence-driven. Several elements of TBL have been considered important, such as
                    carefully formed and managed teams, timely feedback, problem solving, and a
                    competitive element [20].
                    However, due to limitations in organizational structure, availability of
                    learning spaces, and financial constraints, modifications in the TBL sessions
                    may be needed to fit the educational setting. In the current setting, students
                    had full autonomy in forming groups, and the competitive element of TBL was not
                    incorporated. The rationale behind this is based on the self-determination
                    theory. Students were allowed to choose their groups to promote a sense of
                    autonomy, and a sense of relatedness was promoted by creating a safe
                    (non-competitive) space where students could practice and make mistakes [29]. Promoting
                    competitiveness could negatively affect student motivation [29] but also negatively
                    impacts equity [30].
                    The decision to deviate from the classic TBL structure also has a pragmatic
                    reason, as none of the students of the course were obliged to attend all
                    classes. Therefore, prior formation of the groups was not convenient as students
                    might not attend the TBL session. Additionally, it would also lead to extra
                    administrative work for the teachers. Our results demonstrate that despite
                    modifying these elements of TBL, it still had a positive impact on student
                    performance.

The current TBL session, including the iRAT and final exam, was conducted and
                    documented digitally using various online teaching platforms. However, TBL
                    sessions could also be conducted without digital teaching platforms. Elements of
                    TBL such as promoting peer discussion [31], solving authentic problems, activating knowledge
                    through questions, and formative assessments [32] are known to positively affect learning, even
                    outside the TBL context. This could explain the positive effects of TBL in our
                    cohort. Adjusting TBL to fit the educational context can make integration of the
                    TBL method more feasible. However, such adjustments should be guided by
                    educational scholarship, especially prior to large-scale roll-out. Based on our
                    experience, using a variety of active teaching methodologies, TBL being one of
                    them, usually helps to break the monotony for students and teachers.

## 4.2. Future Directions

Further study is required to investigate the impact of integrating TBL on
                    students’ learning strategies. It is essential to evaluate the immediate
                    learning outcomes but also the long-term approach to learning adopted by
                    students after the introduction of TBL. Furthermore, additional research should
                    be directed to extending the influence of TBL on long-term knowledge retention
                    and academic performance. This could give insights into sustained knowledge
                    retention over time and thereby the enduring impact of TBL. Furthermore, it
                    would be interesting to interview students on the benefits of TBL compared to
                    passive teaching methods. Unfortunately, we could not do this, as students were
                    already overwhelmed by the sheer number of evaluations (survey fatigue) [33] they were exposed to
                    and we had to choose low-threshold, to-the-point questions. Increasing the
                    length of the questionnaire could have led to fewer responses [23].

## 4.3. Strengths and Limitations of the Study

Strengths: Herein, we show the importance of adjusting established teaching
                    methodologies by identifying and including the crucial underlying educational
                    principles to fit into individual curricula. Often, excellent teaching
                    methodologies cannot be implemented due to rigid frameworks and logistic
                    reasons. Our study shows that by understanding the underlying educational
                    principles (in this case formative testing, feedback, and problem-solving
                    skills), educators can introduce innovative teaching methods into their
                    curricula with positive outcomes. The barriers to incorporating TBL could be
                    additional workload for teachers, i.e., converting existing lessons into a TBL
                    format, logistic reasons, and student non-acceptance of the teaching method.
                    Especially for the latter, initial resistance could be expected if students are
                    exposed to traditional teaching methods requiring minimal interaction with
                    teachers or students. Similarly, students might not be open to the prior
                    preparation that TBL requires. It is known that students feel that they have a
                    better grasp of the subject matter when following passive learning methods than
                    when exposed to active learning [5]. Unsurprisingly, however, the performance of
                    students participating in active learning is better. If students understand the
                    benefits of TBL, participation and involvement could be improved, leading to
                    better performance. In this light, adapting teaching methodologies to fit
                    existing curricula is needed. Initially, this could be experienced as
                    time-consuming. Nevertheless, it will benefit students in the long run.

Limitations: It is important to acknowledge certain limitations of this study.
                    The current study was conducted in a naturalistic setting, meaning the TBL
                    teaching form was implemented within the existing curriculum. Although this is a
                    strength on the one hand, as our findings are of immediate relevance for our
                    educational setting, the results are limited by a non-randomized sample of
                    learners. This raises the possibility of existing differences between both
                    groups. For example, TBL students may have been more motivated or may have been
                    less confident in their pharmacology knowledge compared to non-attendees.
                    However, randomization was not possible in our setting due to the nature of
                    lessons being non-obligatory. For this reason, the study setting was kept as
                    natural as possible, resulting in groups based on their attendance of the TBL
                    session. Second, academic confidence can be influenced by experience but also by
                    societal factors within or around the academic setting [34]. This study did not
                    correct for possible differences in individual student characteristics. Third,
                    self-assessed perceptions of knowledge, often used as a tool to guide student
                    learning, can be influenced by various individual factors, possibly resulting in
                    self-reporting bias. However, within medical education, self-assessment is
                    considered a credible method for educational program evaluations [35]. Finally, while the
                    study design allowed for comparisons between TBL attendees and non-attendees,
                    factors such as prior pharmacological knowledge and individual study habits may
                    have influenced outcomes. The results must be viewed with these limitations in
                    mind.

## 5. Conclusions

The current findings identify TBL as an engaging and effective instructional approach
                for teaching pharmacology, promoting active learning and practical application of
                knowledge. The current study emphasizes the importance of adapting teaching
                methodologies to suit a given educational context, with modifications guided by an
                evidence-based approach. By integrating TBL’s interactive and collaborative
                elements, educators can enhance student engagement and deepen their understanding of
                pharmacological concepts. Consequently, TBL could be incorporated into the existing
                pharmacology teaching method, promising enriched learning experiences and improved
                academic outcomes. This aligns with the goal of active learning and equipping
                students with the skills necessary for safe and efficient medication prescribing.

**Keywords:**
team-based learning, active learning, pharmacology education, student performance, learning effectiveness

**Funding Sources:**

## References

1.. Wittich C.M., Burkle C.M., Lanier W.. Medication
                    Errors: An Overview for Clinicians. *Mayo Clin. Proc.*. 2014;89:1116-1125. DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.05.007. PMID: 24981217.
2.. Dornan T., Ashcroft D., Heathfield H., Lewis P., Miles J., Taylor D., Tully M., Wass V.. An in Depth Investigation into Causes of Prescribing Errors by
                        Foundation Trainees in Relation to Their Medical Education. EQUIP Study. **. ;:-.
3.. McHugh D., Yanik A.J., Mancini M.R.. An
                    innovative pharmacology curriculum for medical students: Promoting higher order
                    cognition, learner-centered coaching, and constructive feedback through a social
                    pedagogy framework. *BMC Med. Educ.*. 2021;21:-. DOI: 10.1186/s12909-021-02516-y. PMID: 33546690.
4.. Pandit R., Poleij M.C.S., Gerrits M.A.F.M.. Student Perception of Knowledge and Skills in Pharmacology and
                        Pharmacotherapy in a Bachelor’s Medical Curriculum. *Int. Med. Educ.*. 2023;2:206-218. DOI: 10.3390/ime2030020.
5.. Deslauriers L., McCarty L.S., Miller K., Callaghan K., Kestin G.. Measuring
                    actual learning versus feeling of learning in response to being actively engaged
                    in the classroom. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*. 2019;116:19251-19257. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1821936116. PMID: 31484770.
6.. Anthony G.. Active learning in a constructivist framework. *Educ. Stud. Math.*. 1996;31:349-369. DOI: 10.1007/BF00369153.
7.. Doolittle P., Doolittle P., Wojdak K., Wojdak K., Walters A., Walters A.. Defining Active Learning: A Restricted Systemic Review. *Teach. Learn. Inq.*. 2023;11:-. DOI: 10.20343/teachlearninqu.11.25.
8.. Schmidt H.G., Rotgans J.I., Rajalingam P., Low-Beer N.. A
                    Psychological Foundation for Team-Based Learning: Knowledge Reconsolidation. *Acad.
                    Med.*. 2019;94:1878-1883. DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000002810. PMID: 31149922.
9.. Squire L.R., Genzel L., Wixted J.T., Morris R.G.. Memory
                    Consolidation. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.*. 2015;7:-. DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a021766. PMID: 26238360.
10.. Alberini C.M., LeDoux J.E.. Memory
                    reconsolidation. *Curr. Biol.*. 2013;23:R746-R750. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.06.046. PMID: 24028957.
11.. Parmelee D., Michaelsen L.K., Cook S., Hudes P.D.. Team-based
                    learning: A practical guide: AMEE Guide No. 65. *Med.
                    Teach.*. 2012;34:e275-e287. DOI: 10.3109/0142159X.2012.651179. PMID: 22471941.
12.. Burgess A., van Diggele C., Roberts C., Mellis C.. Team-based
                    learning: Design, facilitation and participation. *BMC Med.
                    Educ.*. 2020;20:-. DOI: 10.1186/s12909-020-02287-y. PMID: 33272267.
13.. Hrynchak P., Batty H.. The
                    educational theory basis of team-based learning. *Med.
                    Teach.*. 2012;34:796-801. DOI: 10.3109/0142159X.2012.687120. PMID: 22646301.
14.. Kim D.-H., Lee J.-H., Kim S.A.. The
                    pharmacology course for preclinical students using team-based learning. *Korean
                    J. Med. Educ.*. 2020;32:35-46. DOI: 10.3946/kjme.2020.151. PMID: 32130849.
15.. Alberti S., Motta P., Ferri P., Bonetti L.. The
                    effectiveness of team-based learning in nursing education: A systematic review. *Nurse
                    Educ. Today*. 2021;97:104721-. DOI: 10.1016/j.nedt.2020.104721. PMID: 33385942.
16.. Alanazi A.. A Critical Review of Constructivist Theory and the Emergence of
                        Constructionism. *Am. Res. J. Humanit. Soc. Sci.*. 2016;2:1-8. DOI: 10.21694/2378-7031.16018.
17.. Hein G.E.. Constructivist Learning Theory. *Proceedings of the CECA (International Committee of Museum Educators)
                        Conference*. ;:-.
18.. Adams N.E.. Bloom’s
                    taxonomy of cognitive learning objectives. *J. Med. Libr.
                    Assoc.*. 2015;103:152-153. DOI: 10.3163/1536-5050.103.3.010. PMID: 26213509.
19.. Koriťáková E., Jivram T., Gîlcă-Blanariu G.-E., Churová V., Poulton E., Ciureanu A.I., Louis C., Ștefănescu G., Schwarz D.. Comparison of problem-based and team-based learning strategies: A
                        multi-institutional investigation. *Front. Educ.*. 2023;8:1301269-. DOI: 10.3389/feduc.2023.1301269.
20.. Michaelsen L.K., Davidson N., Major C.H.. Team-based learning practices and principles in comparison with
                        cooperative learning and problem-based learning. *J. Excell Coll. Teach.*. 2014;25:57-84.
21.. Koens F., Mann K.V., Custers E.J.F.M., Cate O.T.J.T.. Analysing
                    the concept of context in medical education. *Med. Educ.*. 2005;39:1243-1249. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2929.2005.02338.x. PMID: 16313584.
22.. Beneroso D., Erans M.. Team-based learning: An ethnicity-focused study on the
                        perceptions of teamwork abilities of engineering students. *Eur. J. Eng. Educ.*. 2021;46:678-689. DOI: 10.1080/03043797.2020.1865879.
23.. Roszkowski M.J., Bean A.G.. Believe it or not! longer questionnaires have lower response
                        rates. *J. Bus. Psychol.*. 1990;4:495-509. DOI: 10.1007/BF01013611.
24.. Swanwick T.. Understanding Medical Education. *Understanding Medical Education: Evidence, Theory, and Practice*. 2018;:-. DOI: 10.1002/9781119373780.
25.. Linn B.S., Zeppa R.. Stress
                    in junior medical students: Relationship to personality and performance. *J.
                    Med. Educ.*. 1984;59:7-12. DOI: 10.1097/00001888-198401000-00002. PMID: 6690704.
26.. El-Banna M.M., Whitlow M., McNelis A.M.. Improving
                    Pharmacology Standardized Test and Final Examination Scores Through Team-Based
                    Learning. *Nurse Educ.*. 2020;45:47-49. DOI: 10.1097/NNE.0000000000000671. PMID: 30950919.
27.. Zgheib N.K., Simaan J.A., Sabra R.. Using
                    team-based learning to teach pharmacology to second year medical students
                    improves student performance. *Med. Teach.*. 2010;32:130-135. DOI: 10.3109/01421590903548521. PMID: 20163228.
28.. Sterpu I., Herling L., Nordquist J., Rotgans J., Acharya G.. Team-based
                    learning (TBL) in clinical disciplines for undergraduate medical
                    students—A scoping review. *BMC Med. Educ.*. 2024;24:-. DOI: 10.1186/s12909-023-04975-x. PMID: 38172844.
29.. Cook D.A., Artino A.R.. Motivation
                    to learn: An overview of contemporary theories. *Med. Educ.*. 2016;50:997-1014. DOI: 10.1111/medu.13074. PMID: 27628718.
30.. Green M., Malcolm C.. Degrees
                    of change: The promise of anti-racist assessment. *Front.
                    Sociol.*. 2023;8:972036-. DOI: 10.3389/fsoc.2023.972036. PMID: 37868089.
31.. Smith M.K., Wood W.B., Adams W.K., Wieman C., Knight J.K., Guild N., Su T.T.. Why
                    Peer Discussion Improves Student Performance on In-Class Concept Questions. *Science*. 2009;323:122-124. DOI: 10.1126/science.1165919. PMID: 19119232.
32.. EChang E.K., Wimmers P.F.. Effect of Repeated/Spaced Formative Assessments on Medical School
                        Final Exam Performance. *Health Prof. Educ.*. 2017;3:32-37. DOI: 10.1016/j.hpe.2016.08.001.
33.. Porter S.R., Whitcomb M.E., Weitzer W.H.. Multiple surveys of students and survey fatigue. *New Dir. Institutional Res.*. 2004;2004:63-73. DOI: 10.1002/ir.101.
34.. Sander P., Sanders L.. Understanding academic confidence. *Psychol. Teach. Rev.*. 2006;12:29-42. DOI: 10.53841/bpsptr.2006.12.1.29.
35.. Peterson L.N., Eva K.W., Rusticus S.A., Lovato C.Y.. The
                    Readiness for Clerkship Survey. *Acad. Med.*. 2012;87:1355-1360. DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0b013e3182676c76. PMID: 22914522.
