# Group I aptazymes as genetic regulatory switches

**Authors:** Kristin M Thompson, Heather A Syrett, Scott M Knudsen, Andrew D Ellington

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 12466025
- Pmc: PMC139998
- Publisher-id: 1472-6750-2-21
- Doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-2-21

**Categories:**
- Research Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Collection: 2002
- Epub: 4-12-2002

## Abstract

### Background

Allosteric ribozymes (aptazymes) that have extraordinary activation
                        parameters have been generated in vitro by design and
                        selection. For example, hammerhead and ligase ribozymes that are activated
                        by small organic effectors and protein effectors have been selected from
                        random sequence pools appended to extant ribozymes. Many ribozymes,
                        especially self-splicing introns, are known control gene regulation or viral
                        replication in vivo. We attempted to generate Group I
                        self-splicing introns that were activated by a small organic effector,
                        theophylline, and to show that such Group I aptazymes could mediate
                        theophylline-dependent splicing in vivo.

### Results

By appending aptamers to the Group I self-splicing intron, we have generated
                        a Group I aptazyme whose in vivo splicing is controlled by
                        exogenously added small molecules. Substantial differences in gene
                        regulation could be observed with compounds that differed by as little as a
                        single methyl group. The effector-specificity of the Group I aptazyme could
                        be rationally engineered for new effector molecules.

### Conclusion

Group I aptazymes may find applications as genetic regulatory switches for
                        generating conditional knockouts at the level of mRNA or for developing
                        economically viable gene therapies.

## Background

Ribozymes whose activities are modulated by effector molecules have previously been
                engineered. For example, Herschlag and co-workers have previously shown that a
                nucleobase could complement an abasic site within the hammerhead ribozyme, restoring
                cleavage activity [1]. Similarly, Porta and
                Lizardi engineered a hammerhead ribozyme that assumed an inactive secondary
                structure; upon the addition of an oligonucleotide that disrupted the engineered
                secondary structure, the ribozyme was activated [2].
                More recently, it has previously been shown that many selected nucleic acid binding
                species (aptamers) undergo conformational changes upon ligand binding [3-6] In
                addition, when aptamers are conjoined to ribozymes, the ligand-induced
                conformational changes in the aptamers frequently modulate the structures and hence
                the activities of the ribozymes [7-9] For example, binding of theophylline to the
                anti-theophylline aptamer [10] modulates the
                conformation of residue [11,12] and the overall stability of the aptamer [10,13].
                Appending the anti-theophylline aptamer to the hammerhead ribozyme allowed cleavage
                activity to be modulated by 110-fold by theophylline [13]. Similarly, appending the anti-theophylline aptamer to a
                small ribozyme ligase (L1) generated an aptazyme that was activated 1,600-fold by
                saturating theophylline concentrations [14].

The methods for engineering and selecting Group I aptazymes appear to be
                generalizable to several different types of ribozymes. Adjoining aptamers to the
                Group I self-splicing intron would potentially allow the control of splicing not
                only in vitro, but in vivo. To this end, we have
                attempted to generate and assay Group I aptazymes.

## Results and Discussion

## Design of Group I aptazymes

In order to convert the Group I self-splicing intron to a regulatable aptazyme,
                    it was necessary to first identify sequences or structures in the ribozyme whose
                    conformation might modulate splicing activity. The structural and kinetic
                    properties of the Group I self-splicing intron from the thymidylate
                    synthase (td) gene in bacteriophage T4 have been
                    extensively studied. In particular, a series of nested deletions of the P6
                    stem-loop have been shown to partially or completely compromise ribozyme
                    activity [15]. More importantly, either
                    magnesium or the tyrosyl tRNA synthetase from Neurospora mitochondria (CYT18)
                    can suppress many of these defects [16,17]. Previous studies with other introns
                    have also revealed that deletion of the P5 stem-loop can modulate ribozyme
                    activity [18,19]. We hypothesized that sites where deletions modulated
                    ribozyme activity might also prove to be sites where aptamer conformational
                    changes would modulate ribozyme activity. Based on these studies, we designed a
                    series of Group I aptazymes in which the anti-theophylline aptamer was
                    substituted for either a portion of P6 or P5 (Figure 1). The anti-theophylline aptamer was attached at the same
                    point as had previously proven successful in the design of
                    theophylline-dependent cleavases and ligases [13
                    ,14].

## Activation in vitro

The self-splicing activities of the Group I aptazymes were examined in
                    vitro using a standard splicing assay (Table 1). Magnesium had previously been shown to suppress
                    structural defects in the td intron, and ligand-induced
                    suppressions of splicing defects were examined by carrying out splicing
                    reactions at either low (3 mM, stringent) or high (8 mM, permissive) magnesium
                    concentrations [15]. Several of the
                    constructs were either relatively inactive (e.g., Th3P6, Th5P6, and Th6P6) or
                    did not consistently show differential splicing activity (e.g., Th4P6 and
                    Th2P5). However, four of the constructs, Th1P6, Th2P6, Th3P6, and Th1P5, showed
                    good activity (>10% of wild-type) and increased self-splicing in the
                    presence of theophylline. For example, Th2P6 showed the greatest activation
                    (8-fold at 8 mM MgCl2), while Th1P5 showed low activation (1.2-fold)
                    at both magnesium concentrations.

For all of the aptazymes except Th3P6, the ligand-induced splicing activity was
                    greater in a standard assay at the more stringent (3 mM) magnesium concentration
                    (Table 1). The construct Th3P6 was
                    inactive at lower magnesium concentrations, but underwent ligand-induced
                    splicing at the more permissive concentration (8 mM). Interestingly, those
                    aptazyme constructs that showed ligand-dependent activity closely resembled the
                    original deletion variants that showed magnesium-dependent recovery of splicing
                    activity. For example, the junction between the aptamer and the Group I ribozyme
                    in the aptazyme Th2P6 resembled the deletion variant td ΔP6-6;
                    the aptazyme was activated by theophylline, while the splicing defect of the
                    deletion variant at 3 mM magnesium was suppressed by 8 mM magnesium or by
                    stabilization of a tetraloop sequence that capped the P6 helix [15]. Defects that poise a ribozyme between
                    active and inactive conformers have previously been used to engineer
                    effector-dependence [20].

The kinetics of splicing of two of the most activated variants, Th1P5 and Th2P6,
                    were examined in the presence and absence of theophylline (Figure 2). As in the single point assays, the
                    theophylline-dependence of the engineered introns was readily apparent (Figure 2a). The time courses reveal that the extents
                    of splicing of the aptazymes were significantly affected by the addition of
                    theophylline (Figures 2b,2c). The aptazyme
                    modified at P5 (Th1P5) showed less theophylline-dependent enhancement of the
                    extent of reaction than the aptazyme modified at P6 (Th2P6), consistent with the
                    single point assays described above. Th1P5 was activated 1.4-fold at 15 minutes
                    (Figure 2b), while Th2P6 showed a 4.0-fold
                    rate enhancement at 15 minutes (Figure 2c).
                    These levels of ligand-dependent activation were similar to those observed with
                    the original hammerhead aptazyme constructs,[21]
                    and it may prove possible to use in vitro selection to further
                    optimize activation [13,14]. However, when the time course data
                    were fit with a single exponential equation, the rates of the initial reactions
                    turned out to be very similar in both the presence and absence of theophylline
                    (Table 2).

Based on these results, the primary mechanism of activation is likely the same as
                    has been observed for other aptazymes: ligand-induced conformational changes
                    that stabilize functional ribozyme sequences and structures. However, the Group
                    I self-splicing intron is a much more complicated ribozyme than either the
                    hammerhead or the L1 ligase; for example, the tertiary structure of the Group I
                    intron is established by a complicated folding pathway. [22-26] Therefore, it
                    was possible that theophylline-binding influenced the overall folding pathway of
                    the engineered Group I aptazyme. In order to assess this possibility we examined
                    the theophylline-dependence of Th2P6 splicing reactions in vitro following
                    prolonged incubation (30 minutes) to allow for re-folding. No significant change
                    in the extent of ligand-dependent activation was observed following
                    pre-incubation (data not shown). These results argue that both GTP and
                    theophylline may need to be present to influence the folding pathway of the
                    engineered Group I aptazymes. These results are also consistent with previous
                    physical[27] and kinetic [28-30]
                    data that shows that the folding of the Group I intron is dependent in part upon
                    GTP.

## Gene regulation in vivo

Each of the successful aptazyme constructs was subsequently cloned into an
                    interrupted thymidylate synthase gene in place of the parental 
                    td self-splicing intron. The vectors were introduced into an E.
                    coli strain (C600ThyA::KanR) that lacked a functional thymidylate
                    synthase gene and that was a thymidine auxotroph. When bacteria grown
                    in rich media were subsequently plated on minimal media lacking thymidine, no
                    colony growth was observed with the exception of Th1P5. However, when
                    theophylline (7.5 mM) was included in the minimal media, bacteria containing the
                    intron Th2P6 formed colonies, and bacteria containing the intron Th1P5 showed
                    increased growth (Figure 3). All introns
                    that originally showed no or low splicing in vitro (including
                    Th3P6) could not rescue bacteria either in the presence or absence of
                    theophylline. Finally, no growth was observed in a negative control that
                    contained a non-functional Group I intron (B11), and no theophylline-dependent
                    changes in growth were observed in a negative control in which mutations were
                    introduced into the aptazyme to abolish theophylline binding (Th2P6.D).
                    Interestingly, no growth was observed for bacteria harboring the intron Th1P6,
                    despite the fact that this aptazyme showed the greatest activation by
                    theophylline in vitro. The plating results were consistent and
                    reproducible over a variety of experiments.

To better characterize the influence of the effector on intron-splicing, we also
                    carried out a series of growth experiments in liquid culture (Figure 4a). An overnight bacterial culture that
                    contained the td gene divided by the aptazyme Th2P6 was
                    inoculated into fresh, minimal media, effector was added, and growth was
                    continuously monitored. As expected based on growth assays on solid media,
                    little growth was observed in the absence of theophylline. However, when
                    theophylline (0.5 mM) was added to liquid medium, bacteria grew almost as well
                    as a control in which the parental intron was inserted into the td gene.
                    Most importantly, bacterial growth was not activated by the structurally-related
                    effector caffeine (i.e., 7-methyltheophylline); the anti-theophylline aptamer is
                    known to discriminate between caffeine and theophylline by a factor of
                    10,000-fold [10]. No effector-dependent
                    growth differences were observed with cultures containing td genes
                    divided by the non-functional Group I intron B11. Similar results were obtained
                    with cultures that contained the td gene divided by the
                    aptazyme Th1P5 (Figure 4b). However, in
                    this instance there was some background growth of uninduced bacteria, consistent
                    with the higher level of background splicing activity in vitro.
                    If theophylline is regulating intron splicing in vivo, then the
                    extent of bacterial growth should be dependent upon the concentration of
                    theophylline introduced into the media (Figure 4c).
                    However, theophylline was toxic to bacteria, and caused a decrease in the growth
                    of bacteria containing the parental td intron at concentrations
                    greater than 0.5 mM. Consistent with this observation, low concentrations of
                    theophylline progressively increased bacterial growth (by activating the 
                    td intron) while concentrations of theophylline above 2 mM
                    progressively decreased bacterial growth (although levels of growth were still
                    well above background).

These results were all consistent with the hypothesis that theophylline regulates
                    intron splicing in vivo. To further probe whether this was in
                    fact the case mRNA was isolated from E. coli treated with
                    theophylline or not, and RT-PCR was used to confirm the presence of spliced
                    introns (Figure 5). For each of the introns
                    known to be responsive to theophylline in vivo (Th2P6 and
                    Th1P5) an increase in spliced mRNA was observed, while most other introns that
                    were not responsive to theophylline in vivo did not show an
                    increase in the levels of spliced mRNA. An exception to this was Th1P6, which
                    originally showed theophylline-dependent splicing in vitro and
                    also showed theophylline-dependent splicing in vivo. However,
                    Th1P6 did not mediate theophylline-dependent growth. The bacterial mRNAs were
                    extracted, cloned, and sequenced, and half of them appeared to use a cryptic
                    splice site.

Several discrepancies were noted between intron activation in vitro and
                    effector-dependent growth. This is not surprising; other studies have revealed
                    that there is often little correlation between ribozyme activity in
                    vitro and in vivo [31].
                    However, since it is known that relatively small changes in gene expression can
                    greatly affect the metabolism of an organism, another possible explanation for
                    the apparent discrepancies is that relatively small modulations in intron
                    splicing are amplified via cellular metabolism to yield growth phenotypes. This
                    would seem especially true in the current set of experiments, since the
                    modulation of Thymidylate Synthase expression is known to greatly affect
                    thymidine levels and cell growth [32].
                    For example, E. coli that are starved for thymine quickly die,
                    a phenomenon known as 'thymineless death' [33].
                    In this respect, Group I aptazymes that may have yielded lower amounts of
                    functional Thymidylate Synthase (e.g., Th3P6, which was less active than Th2P6;
                    or Th1P6, which mis-spliced) did not allow bacterial growth. In contrast,
                    aptazymes that may have yielded even modestly greater amounts of functional
                    Thymidylate Synthase (e.g., Th1P5, which was both highly active and modestly
                    activated in vitro) allowed bacterial growth.

## Effector specificity

In order to examine effector-specificity in vivo, a new series
                    of Group I aptazymes was constructed in which the anti-theophylline aptamer was
                    mutated to bind 3-methylxanthine (3MeX2P6) [34].
                    These variants proved to be responsive to 3-methylxanthine both in vitro 
                    and in vivo (Figure 6a).
                    However, the variants were no longer responsive to theophylline, nor were they
                    responsive to a variety of other analogues, including caffeine,
                    1-methylxanthine, 7-methylxanthine, 1,3-dimethyl urilic acid, hypoxanthine,
                    xanthine, and theobromine (Figure 6b). In
                    contrast, the original aptamer was known to also bind 3-methylxanthine, and the
                    original Group I aptazyme (Th2P6) also proved to be responsive to
                    3-methylxanthine in vivo (Figure 
                    6c). Thus, the responsivity of the aptazymes in vivo appears
                    to mirror their effector specificity in vitro.

## Applications

The ability to engineer Group I introns to be responsive to effector molecules
                    has numerous potential applications. For example, it may prove possible to
                    develop new gene therapies in which patients rely upon drugs that can
                    differentially activate gene expression, rather than having to rely upon a set
                    level of endogenous expression of an introduced gene. Similarly, it may prove
                    possible to use effector-dependent splicing to more finely monitor gene
                    expression in vivo. A drug could be localized to particular
                    organs, cells, or organelles, and splicing of the aptazyme could be monitored
                    via a reporter gene such as luciferase. It is also possible to imagine that
                    engineered introns introduced into reporter genes may find application in
                    high-throughput, cell-based screening assays that monitor drug uptake or
                    efficacy. These strategies should prove useful not only for self-splicing
                    introns activated by drugs, but for introns activated by proteins or peptides.
                    In this regard, it is notable that some natural Group I introns have proven to
                    be highly dependent upon protein cofactors,[35]
                    and that Group I introns have been engineered whose tertiary structure and
                    activity is dependent upon a peptide [36].
                    Such applications could also be melded with other innovations dependent upon the
                    Group I self-splicing intron, such as the introduction of a trans-splicing
                    intron that can potentially repair or modulate the expression of a given mRNA. [37-39
                    ]

## Conclusions

Group I aptazymes that were dependent upon theophylline both in vitro 
                and in vivo were engineered by conjoining the thymidylate
                synthase (td) intron with an anti-theophylline aptamer.
                Although the in vitro activation of splicing was modest (up to an
                18-fold change in initial rate), this change was more than enough to mediate the
                survival of a thymidine-dependent E. coli strain. The ligand
                specificity of the anti-theophylline aptamer carried over to the
                theophylline-dependent aptazyme, and no activation was seen with caffeine, which
                differed by a single methyl group from theophylline. The effector specificity could
                be rationally changed by changing the specificity of the conjoined aptamer: when a
                mutation was introduced into the anti-theophylline aptamer that led to
                discrimination against theophylline and in favor of 3-methylxanthine (that also
                differed from theophylline by a single methyl group), the aptamer became solely
                responsive to 3-methylxanthine in vivo. Group I aptazymes may have
                a number of important biotechnology applications, including use as in vivo,
                real-time reporters and as regulatable gene therapeutics.

## Methods

## 



## Construction of the td intron aptazymes

The wild type plasmid pTZtd1304 [17]
                    contains a fully functional 265 nt derivative of the 1016 nt wild type intron [15]. This derivative also contains the
                    substitutions U34A, which introduces a SpeI site, and U976G, which introduces an
                    EcoRI site. The constructs were made using standard solid phase DNA synthesis,
                    then were PCR-amplified and cloned into pTZtd1304. The parental P6 aptazyme
                    construct was generated by two overlapping oligos, Gp1Wt2 Gp1Wt2.122 (GCC TGA
                    GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC
                    CGT GCT AAA TTG TAG GAC TGC CCG GGT TCT ACA TAA ATG CCT AAC GAC TAT CCC TT) and
                    Gp1Wt3.129 (TAA TCT TAC CCC GGA ATT ATA TCC AGC TGC ATG TCA CCA TGC AGA GCA GAC
                    TAT ATC TCC AAC TTG TTA AAG CAA GTT GTC TAT CGT TTC GAG TCA CTT GAC CCT ACT CCC
                    CAA AGG GAT AGT CGT TAG). These oligonucleotides (100 pmole) were annealed and
                    extended with AMV reverse transcriptase (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway,
                    NJ; 45 units) in AMV RT buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 8 mM MgCl2,
                    50 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT) and dNTPS (200 μM) for 30 minutes at 37°C.
                    The resulting double-stranded DNA was diluted 1:50 and amplified using primers
                    SpeI.24 (TTA TAC TAG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG; 0.4 μM) and EcoRI.24 (CCC GGA
                    ATT CTA TCC AGC TGC ATG; 0.4 μM) in PCR buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.3,
                    50 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.005% gelatin), dNTPS
                    (200 μM) and Taq DNA polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI; 1.5 units). The
                    reactions were thermocycled 15 times at 94°C for 30 seconds,
                    45°C for 30 seconds, 72°C for 1 minute and then purified with a
                    QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The PCR product was
                    digested with SpeI (New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA; 20 units) and EcoRI (50
                    units) in buffer (50 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2,
                    0.025% Triton X-100, 100 μg/ml BSA) at 37°C for 60 minutes,
                    purified, and cloned into SpeI/EcoRI digested pTZtd1304. The negative control
                    and aptazyme constructs were made as described except that Gp1Wt3.129 was
                    replaced with oligonucleotides of the appropriate sequence: B11 GCC TGA GTA TAA
                    GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT GCT
                    AAA TGC CTA ACG ACT ATC CCT T, Th1P6 GCC TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT
                    ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT GCT AAA TTA TAC CAG CAT CGT CTT
                    GAT GCC CTT GGC AGA TAA ATG CCT AAC GAC TAT CCC TT, Th2P6 GCC TGA GTA TAA GGT
                    GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT GCT AAA
                    TTG ATA CCA GCA TCG TCT TGA TGC CCT TGG CAG CAT AAA TGC CTA ACG ACT ATC CCT T,
                    Th3P6 GCC TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT
                    AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT GCA TAC CAG CAT CGT CTT GAT GCC CTT GGC AGG CCT AAC GAC TAT
                    CCC TT, Th4P6 GCC TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC
                    CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT GCT AAA TAT ACC AGC ATC GTC TTG ATG CCC TTG GCA GTA
                    AAT GCC TAA CGA CTA TCC CTT, Th5P6 GCC TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT
                    ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT ATA CCA GCA TCG TCT TGA TGC CCT
                    TGG CAG CTA ACG ACT ATC CCT T, Th6P6 GCC TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TTG TAA TCT
                    ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TCT AGT AGA CAA TCC CGT GAT ACC AGC ATC GTC TTG ATG CCC
                    TTG GCA GCC TAA CGA CTA TCC CTT, Th1P5 TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TAG TAA TCT
                    ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTC TAT ACC AGC ATC GTC TTG ATG CCC TTG GCA GAG ACA ATC CCG
                    TGC TAA ATT GTA GGA CTG CCC GGG TTC TAC ATA AAT GCC TAA CGA CTA TCC CTT, Th2P5
                    TGA GTA TAA GGT GAC TTA TAC TAG TAA TCT ATC TAA ACG GGG AAC CTA TAC CAG CAT CGT
                    CTT GAT GCC CTT GGC AGA CAA TCC CGT GCT AAA TTG TAG GAC TGC CCG GGT TCT ACA TAA
                    ATG CCT AAC GAC TAT CCC TT, 3Mex2P6 GTA ATC TAT CTA AAC GGG GAA CCT CTC TAG TAG
                    ACA ATC CCG TGC TAA ATT GAT ACC AGC ATC GTC TTG ATG CCA TTG GCA GCA TAA ATG CCT
                    AAC GAC TAT CCC TT, and Th2P6.D GTA ATC TAT CTA AAC GGG GAA CCT CTC TAG TAG ACA
                    ATC CCG TGC TAA ATT GAT ACC AGC ATC GTC TTG ATG CCC TTG GTT GCA TAA ATG CCT AAC
                    GAC TAT CCC TT.

## 

The introns were PCR-amplified with KM37 (GAT AAT ACG ACT CAC TAT AAT GGC ATT ACC
                    GCC TTG T) and GM24 (GCT CTA GAC TTA GCT ACA ATA TGA AC) in 25 μl
                    reactions under the conditions stated above and cycled 20 times. A portion of
                    the reaction (5 μl) was run on a 3% agarose gel and the PCR product band
                    was stabbed with a pipette tip. The agarose plug was added to a fresh PCR
                    reaction (100 μl) and cycled 15 times; DNA was purified using a QIAquick
                    kit and quantitated. The PCR product (2 μg in 50 μl) was added
                    to an in vitro transcription reaction containing Ampliscribe T7
                    RNA polymerase (Epicentre), RNase inhibitor (GIBCO BRL, Rockville, MD; 5 units),
                    low Mg2+ buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 7.5 mM DTT, 4.5 mM MgCl2,
                    1.5 mM spermidine), UTP (1.25 mM), ATP (2.5 mM), GTP (2.5 mM), CTP (7.5 mM) and
                    α-32P UTP (NEN, Boston, MA; 20 μCi; 3000 mCi/mmol),
                    and incubated at 37°C for 2 hours. DNase (GIBCO BRL, 295 units) was
                    added and the reaction was incubated at 37°C for an additional 30
                    minutes. The RNA was purified using Centri-Sep columns (Princeton Separations,
                    Adelphia, NJ) and quantitated.

## 

The assays were performed by heating the RNA (500 nM) in H2O to
                    70°C for 3 minutes then transferring to ice for 1 minute. Splicing
                    buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2), effector
                    (theophylline, 1.5 mM) was added and the reactions were incubated on ice for an
                    additional 15 minutes. At this time a 4.5 μl aliquot was removed for a
                    zero time point and quenched with 5 μl stop dye (95% formamide, 20 mM
                    EDTA, 0.5% xylene cyanol, and 0.5% bromophenol blue). GTP (50 μM) was
                    added to the remaining reaction (5 μl total volume) to start the
                    splicing reaction. The reaction was incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes and
                    then terminated with stop dye (5 μl). The reactions were heated to
                    70°C for 3 minutes and 5 μl was analyzed on a 8% denaturing
                    polyacrylamide gel. The gel was dried, exposed to a phosphor screen and analyzed
                    using a Molecular Dynamics Phosphorimager (Sunnyvale, CA).

The reaction volumes were increased for the rate determination assay. Aliquots
                    were taken at intervals between 0 minutes and 15 minutes and terminated with
                    stop dye. The reactions were analyzed as described above. For each time point,
                    the number of counts in unreacted intron, spliced intron, and circularized
                    intron were determined. Background counts were subtracted from these values. The
                    fraction of reacted intron was then calculated as:

(circular intron + spliced intron) / (unreacted intron + circular intron
                        + spliced intron)

The individual time points were averaged together, the fraction reacted was
                    plotted versus time, and rate constants were extracted by fitting the data to a
                    single-exponential equation:



The plotted data and rate constants for Th1P5 and Th2P6 constructs are shown in
                    Figures 2b and 2c and Table 2. The
                    changes in the extent of reaction observed between individual experiments, and
                    thus the attendant error bars, were consistent with those observed during the
                    kinetic analyses of other ribozymes. For example, studies of the hairpin
                    ribozyme have shown that data points can vary between individual experiments by
                    as much as 50% [40]. Our data points
                    typically varied from one another by less than 30%.

## 

The plasmids containing the various group I constructs were transformed into
                    competent C600ThyA::KanR cells and grown in LB with kanamycin
                    overnight. A small aliquot (3 μl) of overnight cell culture was mixed
                    with effector (theophylline, 7.5 mM) or H2O, spotted on plates, and
                    grown overnight at 37°C. As a positive control, all constructs were also
                    plated on minimal media plates with thymine (MMT) and assayed for viability.

## 

Cells grown overnight in LB were diluted 1:100 in MM containing either
                    theophylline, caffeine, 3-methylxanthine or no effector, and analyzed on a
                    Microbiology Workstation Bioscreen C (Labsystems, Inc., Franklin, MA).

## RT-PCR analysis

RNA was isolated from an overnight culture using a MasterPure RNA purification
                    kit (Epicentre, Madison, WI) and amplified by RT-PCR using primers KM37 and GM24
                    following the protocol provided for Tth polymerase. The products were separated
                    and analyzed on a 3% agarose gel.

## Authors' Contributions

Kristin M. Thompson conceived of, designed, and carried out most of the experiments
                described in this paper and analyzed the resultant data. Heather A. Syrett repeated
                a number of these experiments and showed that the in vivo activation
                of the intron was reproducible. Scott M. Knudsen assisted in data analysis. Andrew
                D. Ellington conceived of these experiments and assisted in the design of
                experiments and data analysis.

## References

1. Peracchi A, Beigelman L, Usman N, Herschlag D. Rescue of abasic hammerhead ribozymes by exogenous addition of
                        specific bases.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1996;93:11522-11527. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.21.11522. PMID: 8876168.
2. Porta H, Lizardi PM. An allosteric hammerhead ribozyme.. *Biotechnology (N Y)*. 1995;13:161-164. DOI: 10.1038/nbt0295-161. PMID: 9634757.
3. Hermann T, Patel DJ. Adaptive recognition by nucleic acid aptamers.. *Science*. 2000;287:820-825. DOI: 10.1126/science.287.5454.820. PMID: 10657289.
4. Jiang F, Gorin A, Hu W, Majumdar A, Baskerville S, Xu W, Ellington A, Patel DJ. Anchoring an extended HTLV-1 Rex peptide within an RNA major
                        groove containing junctional base triples.. *Structure Fold Des*. 1999;7:1461-1472. DOI: 10.1016/S0969-2126(00)88337-9. PMID: 10647177.
5. Patel DJ, Suri AK, Jiang F, Jiang L, Fan P, Kumar RA, Nonin S. Structure, recognition and adaptive binding in RNA aptamer
                        complexes.. *J Mol Biol*. 1997;272:645-664. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1281. PMID: 9368648.
6. Patel DJ. Structural analysis of nucleic acid aptamers.. *Curr Opin Chem Biol*. 1997;1:32-46. DOI: 10.1016/S1367-5931(97)80106-8. PMID: 9667843.
7. Soukup GA, Breaker RR. Design of allosteric hammerhead ribozymes activated by
                        ligand-induced structure stabilization.. *Structure Fold Des*. 1999;7:783-791. DOI: 10.1016/S0969-2126(99)80102-6. PMID: 10425680.
8. Soukup GA, Breaker RR. Nucleic acid molecular switches.. *Trends Biotechnol*. 1999;17:469-476. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-7799(99)01383-9. PMID: 10557159.
9. Marshall KA, Ellington AD. Training ribozymes to switch.. *Nat Struct Biol*. 1999;6:992-994. DOI: 10.1038/14872. PMID: 10542083.
10. Jenison RD, Gill SC, Pardi A, Polisky B. High-resolution molecular discrimination by RNA.. *Science*. 1994;263:1425-1429. PMID: 7510417.
11. Zimmermann GR, Shields TP, Jenison RD, Wick CL, Pardi A. A semiconserved residue inhibits complex formation by stabilizing
                        interactions in the free state of a theophylline-binding RNA.. *Biochemistry*. 1998;37:9186-9192. DOI: 10.1021/bi980082s. PMID: 9636066.
12. Zimmermann GR, Jenison RD, Wick CL, Simorre JP, Pardi A. Interlocking structural motifs mediate molecular discrimination
                        by a theophylline-binding RNA [see comments].. *Nat Struct Biol*. 1997;4:644-649. DOI: 10.1038/nsb0897-644. PMID: 9253414.
13. Soukup GA, Breaker RR. Engineering precision RNA molecular switches.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1999;96:3584-3589. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.7.3584. PMID: 10097080.
14. Robertson MP, Ellington AD. Design and optimization of effector-activated ribozyme ligases.. *Nucleic Acids Res*. 2000;28:1751-1759. DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.8.1751. PMID: 10734194.
15. Galloway Salvo JL, Coetzee T, Belfort M. Deletion-tolerance and trans-splicing of the bacteriophage T4 td
                        intron. Analysis of the P6-L6a region.. *J Mol Biol*. 1990;211:537-549. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(90)90264-M. PMID: 2308166.
16. Mohr G, Zhang A, Gianelos JA, Belfort M, Lambowitz AM. The neurospora CYT-18 protein suppresses defects in the phage T4
                        td intron by stabilizing the catalytically active structure of the intron
                        core.. *Cell*. 1992;69:483-494. DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90449-M. PMID: 1533818.
17. Myers CA, Wallweber GJ, Rennard R, Kemel Y, Caprara MG, Mohr G, Lambowitz AM. A tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase suppresses structural defects in the
                        two major helical domains of the group I intron catalytic core.. *J Mol Biol*. 1996;262:87-104. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0501. PMID: 8831782.
18. Joyce GF, van der Horst G, Inoue T. Catalytic activity is retained in the Tetrahymena group I intron
                        despite removal of the large extension of element P5.. *Nucleic Acids Res*. 1989;17:7879-7889. PMID: 2477801.
19. Mohr G, Caprara MG, Guo Q, Lambowitz AM. A tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase can function similarly to an RNA
                        structure in the Tetrahymena ribozyme [see comments].. *Nature*. 1994;370:147-150. DOI: 10.1038/370147a0. PMID: 8022484.
20. Soukup GA, Breaker RR. Allosteric nucleic acid catalysts.. *Curr Opin Struct Biol*. 2000;10:318-25. DOI: 10.1016/S0959-440X(00)00090-7. PMID: 10851196.
21. Tang J, Breaker RR. Rational design of allosteric ribozymes.. *Chem Biol*. 1997;4:453-459. DOI: 10.1016/S1074-5521(97)90197-6. PMID: 9224568.
22. Treiber DK, Williamson JR. Exposing the kinetic traps in RNA folding.. *Curr Opin Struct Biol*. 1999;9:339-345. DOI: 10.1016/S0959-440X(99)80045-1. PMID: 10361090.
23. Treiber DK, Rook MS, Zarrinkar PP, Williamson JR. Kinetic intermediates trapped by native interactions in RNA
                        folding.. *Science*. 1998;279:1943-1946. DOI: 10.1126/science.279.5358.1943. PMID: 9506945.
24. Russell R, Herschlag D. New pathways in folding of the Tetrahymena group I RNA enzyme.. *J Mol Biol*. 1999;291:1155-1167. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.3026. PMID: 10518951.
25. Wu M, Tinoco I. RNA folding causes secondary structure rearrangement.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1998;95:11555-11560. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.20.11555. PMID: 9751704.
26. Doherty EA, Doudna JA. The P4-P6 domain directs higher order folding of the Tetrahymena
                        ribozyme core.. *Biochemistry*. 1997;36:3159-3169. DOI: 10.1021/bi962428+. PMID: 9115992.
27. Emerick VL, Woodson SA. Fingerprinting the folding of a group I precursor RNA.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1994;91:9675-9679. PMID: 7937871.
28. Bevilacqua PC, Johnson KA, Turner DH. Cooperative and anticooperative binding to a ribozyme.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1993;90:8357-8361. PMID: 8397404.
29. Bevilacqua PC, Li Y, Turner DH. Fluorescence-detected stopped flow with a pyrene labeled
                        substrate reveals that guanosine facilitates docking of the 5' cleavage site
                        into a high free energy binding mode in the Tetrahymena ribozyme.. *Biochemistry*. 1994;33:11340-11348. DOI: 10.1021/bi00203a032. PMID: 7727385.
30. McConnell TS, Cech TR, Herschlag D. Guanosine binding to the Tetrahymena ribozyme: thermodynamic
                        coupling with oligonucleotide binding.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1993;90:8362-8366. PMID: 8378306.
31. Kato Y, Kuwabara T, Warashina M, Toda H, Taira K. Relationships between the activities in vitro and in vivo of
                        various kinds of ribozyme and their intracellular localization in mammalian
                        cells.. *J Biol Chem*. 2001;276:15378-15385. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M010570200. PMID: 11278700.
32. Crecy-Lagard de, Bellalou VA J, Mutzel R, Marliere P. Long term adaptation of a microbial population to a permanent
                        metabolic constraint: overcoming thymineless death by experimental evolution
                        of Escherichia coli.. *BMC Biotechnol*. 2001;1:10-. DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-1-10. PMID: 11737878.
33. Ahmad SI, Kirk SH, Eisenstark A. Thymine metabolism and thymineless death in prokaryotes and
                        eukaryotes.. *Annu Rev Microbiol*. 1998;52:591-625. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.micro.52.1.591. PMID: 9891809.
34. Soukup GA, Emilsson GA, Breaker RR. Altering molecular recognition of RNA aptamers by allosteric
                        selection.. *J Mol Biol*. 2000;298:623-632. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.3704. PMID: 10788325.
35. Lambowitz AM, Caprara MG, Zimmerly S, Perlman PS. Group I and group II ribozymes as RNPs: clues to the past and
                        guides to the future.. *in The RNA World, CTR*. 1999;:451-485.
36. Atsumi S, Ikawa Y, Shiraishi H, Inoue T. Design and development of a catalytic ribonucleoprotein.. *Embo J*. 2001;20:5453-5460. DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.19.5453. PMID: 11574477.
37. Watanabe T, Sullenger BA. RNA repair: a novel approach to gene therapy.. *Adv Drug Deliv Rev*. 2000;44:2-3. DOI: 10.1016/S0169-409X(00)00089-2.
38. Watanabe T, Sullenger BA. Induction of wild-type p53 activity in human cancer cells by
                        ribozymes that repair mutant p53 transcripts.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 2000;97:8490-8494. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.150104097. PMID: 10890910.
39. Sullenger BA, Cech TR. Ribozyme-mediated repair of defective mRNA by targeted,
                        trans-splicing.. *Nature*. 1994;371:619-622. DOI: 10.1038/371619a0. PMID: 7935797.
40. Esteban JA, Walter NG, Kotzorek G, Heckman JE, Burke JM. Structural basis for heterogeneous kinetics: reengineering the
                        hairpin ribozyme.. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A*. 1998;95:6091-6096. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.11.6091. PMID: 9600922.
41. Damberger SH, Gutell RR. A Comparative Database of Group I Intron Structures.. *Nucleic Acids Res*. 1994;22:3508-3510. PMID: 7937050.
42. Cech TR, Damberger SH, Gutell RR. Representation of the secondary and tertiary structure of group I
                        introns.. *Nat Struct Biol*. 1994;1:273-280. DOI: 10.1038/nsb0594-273. PMID: 7545072.
43. Zimmermann GR, Wick CL, Shields TP, Jenison RD, Pardi A. Molecular interactions and metal binding in the
                        theophylline-binding core of an RNA aptamer.. *Rna*. 2000;6:659-667. DOI: 10.1017/S1355838200000169. PMID: 10836787.
