# The Highly Durable Antibacterial Gel-like Coatings for Textiles

**Authors:** Seyedali Mirmohammadsadeghi, David Juhas, Mikhail Parker, Kristina Peranidze, Dwight Austin Van Horn, Aayushi Sharma, Dhruvi Patel, Tatyana A. Sysoeva, Vladislav Klepov, Vladimir Reukov, Andrea Zille

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 38920944
- Pmc: PMC11202987
- Doi: 10.3390/gels10060398
- Publisher-id: gels-10-00398

**Categories:**
- Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 13-6-2024
- Collection: 6-2024

## Abstract

## 1. Introduction

Infectious diseases continue to be one of the leading causes of death around the
                world and are a priority in global public health [1,2]. Based on a recent study,
                infection-related deaths were the second leading cause of death, accounting for 13.7
                million mortalities in 2019. To clarify more, between 10 and 18% of all main causes
                of death were attributed to 33 bacterial pathogens, including the resistant strains,
                which can mainly be found in contaminated areas, e.g., clinical wards [3].

Hospital-acquired infections (HAIs), as a fourth primary cause of death in the United
                States, have imposed a considerable burden on healthcare systems in both human
                resources and economic issues [4].
                High-touch surfaces in hospitals and other health centers, such as floors, beds,
                tables, and textile-based materials, are at risk of being contaminated by pathogenic
                bacteria. They can easily transfer infectious microbes to patients and hospital
                workers and cause additional problems [
                5]. Drug-resistant infections spreading via textile surfaces pose serious
                threats, and eliminating bacteria from such surfaces has the potential to
                drastically reduce the spread. To tackle this issue of contaminated hospital textile
                materials, the common ways are to use disinfectants to remove surface germs and kill
                bacteria or use disposable items several times a day. Both methods are burdensome
                for healthcare systems since they are time-consuming and less effective than
                expected. The high transmission rate of pathogens can still infect patients and
                healthcare workers with weakened immune systems. In addition, antibiotic overuse is
                increasing, which can cause the emergence of resistant bacteria and various
                environmental pollutions [6]. Therefore, antibacterial surfaces, particularly in
                textiles, are becoming increasingly desirable to protect against different types of
                microorganisms [5,7,8,9,10,11
                ,12,13
                ,14,15
                ].

Various hospital textiles, such as privacy drapes, upholstery, lab coats, and scrub
                suits, can be an ideal environment for a broad range of microorganisms, such as
                bacteria and fungi, to live for months [
                7]. These textiles are prone to being contaminated by bacteria and transfer
                them to the human body [8]. The
                porosity of these materials creates good conditions for microorganisms to thrive by
                providing moisture and warmth [5,8,9].

There are different types of antibacterial agents that could be used to create
                antimicrobial textiles. These include chemical compounds, natural extracts, and
                metal nanoparticles. Chlorinated aromatic structures, N-halamines, and Quaternary
                Ammonium compounds are the most common chemical compounds for antibacterial fabric
                finishing in the textile industry [16
                ].

As a chlorinated aromatic structure, one of the chemical antimicrobial agents,
                Triclosan, has been used in different products, such as toothpaste, soaps, shampoos,
                and facial cleaners. Based on the hydrophobic nature of Triclosan, it has been
                incorporated into various plastic-based materials, including textiles and air
                filters. It alters the integrity of the microbe’s membranes and disrupts
                bacterial fatty acid synthesis by inhibiting the activity of enzymes, which are
                involved in its synthesis. Triclosan’s antibacterial properties are affected
                by its concentration and the coating process of treated materials. Although it
                showed higher antibacterial properties when it was concentrated in some studies, the
                bacteria utilize the multidrug-resistance (MDR) efflux pump to expel the drug,
                thereby reducing its activity. The efficacy of the efflux pump decreased at lower
                concentrations, and it did not allow the bacteria to form colonies. However, the
                main drawbacks of using Triclosan are related to environmental concerns. The
                presence of Triclosan in the environment can accumulate in aquatic organisms, such
                as fish and algae. It disrupts the endocrine system of aquatic organisms, affecting
                their growth and reproduction and increasing bacteria resistance against Triclosan [17,18].

N-halamines, such as 2,2,5,5-Tetramethyl-Imidozalidin-4-One (TMIO), create covalent
                bonds with nitrogen and halogen, offering broad-spectrum antibacterial activity [19,20]. Another amine-based N-halamine,
                bis(N-chloro-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidinyl) sebacate (Cl-BTMP), was used as the
                antimicrobial agent due to its potent antimicrobial efficiency, along with good
                light and thermal stabilities [
                    21]. Quaternary Ammonium compounds (QACs) disrupt microbial cell
                membranes through positively charged nitrogen, exerting biocidal effects against
                various microorganisms [22,23]. While these compounds offer
                effective antibacterial properties, concerns arise regarding their environmental
                impact, potential health risks, and durability during washing or exposure to high
                temperatures. The selection of antibacterial compounds for fabric finishing requires
                a careful balance between efficacy, environmental considerations, and durability [16,24].

Natural substances, such as plant extracts, essential oils, and animal products,
                provide various antimicrobial properties. The investigations of the antimicrobial
                properties of various natural dyes extracted from plants have increased the variety
                of antimicrobial agents, contributing significantly to the production of
                antibacterial fabric. Natural plant extracts, such as curcumin, basil, clove oil,
                cyclic oligosaccharides, and sericin, and natural plants, including onion, aloe
                vera, and pomegranate, have shown unique antimicrobial properties [25,26
                ,27]. Caffeic acid and quercetin as two types of material
                extracted from plants have also demonstrated antibacterial properties [28,29].
                Natural plant extracts offer potential benefits, but they have some considerable
                drawbacks. One key limitation is the variability in composition and potency,
                influenced by factors like plant growth conditions and extraction methods, leading
                to an inconsistent efficacy. The spectrum of the antimicrobial activity may be
                limited, and the concentrations for effectiveness can vary. Degradation over time
                affects stability and shelf life, while the solubility, bioavailability, and
                formulation challenges may impede practical application.

Using metals and metal salts, such as silver, copper, gold, zinc oxide, and titanium
                dioxide, for their antimicrobial properties in textiles has a rich historical
                background. They can be toxic to pathogens, even at a very low concentration.
                Titanium dioxide and zinc oxide are employed for their bactericidal properties, with
                TiO2 acting as a photocatalyst that requires UV radiation for
                antibacterial applications. ZnO offers a cost-effective agent with superior
                whitening and UV-blocking properties on textiles. However, challenges such as the
                need for UV radiation and potential limitations in killing microbes exist for these
                coating agents. Copper has excellent antibacterial properties and poses a biocidal
                effect. While it is not as effective as silver for antibacterial action, copper is
                still considered a promising material to be incorporated into different substrates,
                including textiles [16,30 ,31].

Nanoparticles, particularly silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), are prominent for their
                broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity, self-cleaning properties, and increased
                dyeability. AgNPs have demonstrated effectiveness against various microbes. Its
                antibacterial effectiveness is superb compared with other metal-based materials,
                such as Cu-based ones, ZnO, and TiO2. The minimum bactericidal
                concentration for silver is lower than other metal-based antibacterial agents,
                including copper-based ones. It can even have an antibacterial efficiency in a small
                amount [30]. In contrast to
                antibiotics, which use specific mechanisms of action against pathogens, the biocidal
                effect of silver nanoparticles has been reported with different mechanisms. One
                mechanism of action is that due to the electrostatic attraction of silver ions to
                sulfur proteins, they can adhere to the cell wall and cytoplasmic membrane of
                bacteria, which increases the permeability of the cytoplasmic membrane and disrupts
                the bacterial envelope [7,8,32,33
                ].

The challenges associated with the production and coating processes of AgNPs include
                agglomeration, achieving the desired morphology and the production of a uniform
                particle size. Agglomeration decreases the stability and efficacy of AgNPs, which
                needs effective reagents to overcome this challenge [2]. The common reducing agents, such as sodium dodecyl
                sulfate and ascorbate, are toxic and hazardous and cause serious environmental
                problems. Capping with natural compounds has emerged as a solution to promote the
                stability of AgNPs, particularly when applied to textiles. However, weak
                interactions on the fabric surface are considered a significant drawback. To address
                this, the impregnation of capping agents, whether synthetic polymers or natural
                biological agents, becomes important for enhancing the stability of AgNPs on
                textiles. Among the various capping agents, chitosan, as a biodegradable and
                biocompatible biopolymer, also has weak antibacterial and antifungal properties [34,35,36]. A range of mechanisms were reported that mainly
                involves penetrating the phospholipid bilayer of the bacterial membranes and
                disrupting the cytoplasmic membrane [37]. Chitosan can also be an ideal reagent, which
                mitigates agglomeration by introducing electrostatic repulsion and steric hindrance
                between AgNPs [1]. Moreover, due
                to having active functional groups in the chitosan structure, it forms hydrogen
                bonds with cotton, hydrolyzed polyester, and nylon fabrics [38]. This multi-functionality of
                chitosan makes it a promising candidate for achieving stable, well-dispersed, and
                antimicrobial AgNP-coated textiles, which can tackle the challenges in both the
                production and long-term stability fields [39]. The application of chitosan as a coating agent or
                stabilizer for silver nanoparticles has been reported in several studies that
                demonstrated better stability and antimicrobial efficacy [2 ,10,37
                ,40,41
                ,42,43].
                For instance, Siva et al. synthesized chitosan–silver nanocomposites with an
                average particle size of 10 nm to study their antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus
                    aureus and Escherichia coli [37].

A non-leaching functional textile is generally preferred because it retains its
                antimicrobial activity for an extended period. Moreover, releasing significant
                amounts of antimicrobial agents into the environment can be an environmental issue [16]. Therefore, in this study, a
                gel-like solution containing chitosan-bound silver chloride microparticles (AgMPs)
                was developed in two distinct average sizes to investigate their impacts on
                antibacterial properties, considering concerns about their environmental impact when
                they are nano-sized. Our focus included the durability and effectiveness of cotton
                fabrics coated with silver–chitosan over multiple washes. Staphylococcus
                    aureus, Escherichia coli, and
                multidrug-resistant strains (MG and ES) were chosen to study the efficiency of the
                coated fabrics.

## 2. Results and Discussion

## 2.1. Silver Shell™ Solution Characterization

The sample of Silver Shell™ solution was annealed at 80 °C over 2
                    h to obtain a film for the phase composition study. The PXRD data collected for
                    the material are demonstrated in Figure
                    1. The diffractogram illustrates the presence of AgCl, Ag2O,
                    and Ag phases, which corresponds to the method of solution synthesis developed
                    at Chitozan Health LLC. The synthesis includes the precipitation of AgCl
                    submicron particles into a chitosan solution that stabilizes the particles by
                    increasing the zeta potential and reduces silver ion migration from silver
                    particles. Narrow characteristic peaks corresponding to the identified phases
                    indicate the regions of high crystallinity.

The TEM images of synthesized SS26 and AgMP034 are shown in Figure 2a,b, respectively. According to Figure 2a, the submicron particles were scattered
                    separately and primarily exhibited a spherical morphology. However, some
                    multi-shaped particles were also observed, which might have been the result of
                    aggregation during the preparation of particles for TEM analysis. The TEM image
                    of AgMP034 (Figure 2b)
                    showed a core–shell structure, in which chitosan formed a protective
                    shell around groupings of microparticles. Based on the TEM images, the median
                    size of the particles was found to be 100 nm for SS26 (Figure 2c) and around 202 nm
                    for AgMP034 (Figure 2d).
                    The formation of a chitosan shell is advantageous due to its ability to form
                    hydrogen bonds with the functional groups present in materials like cotton or
                    nylon, thereby facilitating specific interactions and enhancing the coating
                    stability.

The analysis of the EDX (Figure 3)
                    showed the presence of Ag and Cl elements, which were related to the
                    precipitation of AgCl.

## 2.2. Coating Characterization

Cotton fabrics coated with Silver Shell™ solution were chosen in this
                    work. Generally, cotton and silver particles display physical adsorption [9]. The morphological changes
                    in cotton fabrics coated with Silver Shell™ after 25, 50, and 75 washing
                    cycles were monitored by FE-SEM. As shown in Figure 4a and Figure 5a, the Silver
                    Shell™ was uniformly deposited on the cotton fabric surface. The surface
                    of the cotton fabric was relatively smooth after the coating. After washing the
                    samples, Figure 4b–d and Figure 5b–d show that the Silver
                    Shell™ began to detach, along with the cotton fibers, with the most
                    noticeable detachment observed after 75 washing cycles. However, for SS26, there
                    were some detachments after 50 washing cycles. The results showed that the
                    Silver Shell™ had a strong bond with cotton fabrics due to the presence
                    of hydrogen bonding between the chitosan and cotton.



## 2.3. Antibacterial Studies

Cotton fabrics, as one of the most common types of textiles, are prone to the
                    growth of microorganisms. Dangerous pathogens, particularly bacteria, can
                    flourish in these fabrics and cause several problems [
                        44]. Therefore, antibacterial textiles are essential in highly
                    contaminated areas, including hospitals, as they can minimize the spread of
                    pathogens. The main goal of this study was to develop highly durable textile
                    fabrics with antimicrobial properties, even after multiple washes. This was
                    achieved by coating the cotton fabrics with a gel-like silver–chitosan
                    solution. To investigate the antibacterial properties of the coated fabric,
                    AATCC 100 (quantitative analysis) and AATCC 147 (qualitative analysis) were
                    utilized. Table 1 shows
                    the killing efficiencies of AgMP034 and SS26 after undergoing 75 wash cycles,
                    and also A34 without washing and after 25 and 50 cycles following the AATCC 100
                    method. Untreated cotton fabric was also used as a control sample. According to Table 2, all treated samples, except A34, after 50
                    washing cycles showed a 100 percent reduction in both E.
                    coli and S. aureus, even after 75 wash
                    cycles. Despite the decreased silver content due to washing, the remaining
                    quantity surpassed the minimum Ag concentration necessary to sustain their
                    antibacterial properties. Our preliminary studies indicate that 100% bacterial
                    reduction on coated cotton fabrics required a minimum Ag coverage of around 7.5
                    µg/g of fabric.

To investigate the effect of the crosslinking agent on the durability of coated
                    fabrics, sample A34 was prepared. Table 1 showed that after 50 wash cycles, the
                    reduction percent decreased to 99.88 (log 10 reduction of 2.927) and 99.81 (log
                    10 reduction of 2.723) for E.
                        coli and S. aureus, respectively. The
                    lack of the crosslinking agent caused a weaker interaction between the silver
                    particles and cotton fabrics.

The antibacterial properties of the uncoated and silver-coated cotton fabrics
                    were also analyzed through the AATCC 147 method. Parallel streaks of both S. aureus as Gram-positive and E.
                    coli as Gram-negative bacteria were drawn in separate Petri dishes and
                    subsequently covered with the pieces of the samples. Figure 7 shows the
                    photographs of the negative control and control inoculated with bacteria as a
                    reference. The bacterial growth that occurred underneath the uncoated fabrics
                    was visible. Also, there was no bacterial growth on the agar for the negative
                    control, indicating that the incubator’s environment and samples were
                    clean. Based on Figure 8,
                    sample A34 without washing and after 25 wash cycles showed no growth of
                    bacteria, which indicated splendid antibacterial activities. However, after 50
                    wash cycles, there were bacteria colonies, which may be attributed to the lack
                    of enough silver coverage on this sample. In fact, due to the lack of
                    crosslinking agent, silver particles coated with chitosan lost their stability
                    on the fabric and were washed away during laundering. For sample A34 without
                    washing, a slight inhibition zone was observed around the fabric, indicating the
                    leaching of silver particles. This likely resulted from a weak interaction
                    between the coating material and fabric, leading to a gradual release by
                    washing. However, there was no distinct boundary for sample A34 after 25 wash
                    cycles.

To study the effect of the crosslinking agent on the washing durability, the
                    antibacterial activities of AgMP034 and SS26 were also qualitatively tested
                    against the same bacterial strains used for previous samples, and the results
                    are shown in Figure 9 for E.
                        coli and Figure 10
                    for S. aureus. Based on Figure 9 and Figure 10, all the coated samples showed remarkable
                    antibacterial efficacy, even after 75 wash cycles, which can be attributed to
                    the sufficient Ag coverage on the samples. Therefore, highly durable coated
                    fabrics can be obtained by using a crosslinking agent. The crosslinking agent
                    helped to form a stable and durable coating on the cotton fabrics. It improved
                    the adherence of the microparticles to the cotton fibers, resulting in
                    sufficient antibacterial properties, even after several washing cycles.

## 2.4. Bactericidal Action against Multidrug-Resistant E. coli Strains

We conducted pilot experiments that compared the non-pathogenic E.
                        coli MG1655 strain and the extended-spectrum b-lactamase-producing
                    ESBL41 and ESBL146 E. coli isolates. Samples of
                    unbleached muslin coated with the Silver Shell™ (A34) were tested
                    according to the AATCC 100 protocol described above. According to Table 2, we found a strong (over 3 log) reduction
                    for all tested strains regardless of using freshly coated textile samples or
                    those that were washed 25 times. This confirmed prior tests with model E.
                        coli and S. aureus strains (Table 1) and showed that in this setup, the Ag
                    bactericidal action was similar toward antibiotic-sensitive and
                    antibiotic-resistant ESBL isolates.

## 2.5. Color Measurement Study

The color measurements were carried out to study how the color of the cotton
                    fabrics was impacted by coating with gel-like Silver Shell™ solutions.
                    These values are defined as L* for lightness, a* for red (+) to green
                    (−), and b* for yellow (+) to blue (−) [
                        9]. Table 3
                    and Table
                        4 show the CIE L*a*b* values for SS26 and AgMP034 after 75 washing
                    cycles, respectively. The color coordinates were also measured for the untreated
                    cotton for comparison. Based on the results, by applying the fabrics with Silver
                    Shell™, L* was decreased and both a* and b* were increased. Although
                    there was a slight change for a*, the significant change was attributed to b*,
                    which showed higher values for treated samples. Therefore, the bluish appearance
                    of untreated cotton would change to yellowness.

The quality of the coating was evaluated based on the CIE L*a*b* color difference
                    formula as follows [45]: 
                        (1)
                        
                            
                                
                                    ∆
                                    E
                                    
                                        *
                                        ab
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                        ∆
                                        
                                            
                                                L
                                                *
                                            
                                            
                                                2
                                            
                                        
                                        +
                                        ∆
                                        
                                            
                                                a
                                                *
                                            
                                            
                                                2
                                            
                                        
                                        +
                                        ∆
                                        
                                            
                                                b
                                                *
                                            
                                            
                                                2

Measurements were randomly taken at five different locations and the color
                    difference between each pair of these five spots was calculated, resulting in
                    the average values presented in Table
                    3 and Table 4. Based on the
                    results, the color difference between SS26 and AgMP034 was below 2. This
                    suggests a slight color difference, indicating a uniformity in the coating. The
                    average values of color difference for SS26 and AgMP034 before washing were 0.96
                    and 1.91, respectively.



## 3. Conclusions

In summary, the present study provided data on the structures and antibacterial
                efficiency of coated cotton fabrics using Silver ShellTM solution. The
                results indicate the valuable and innovative Silver Shell™ solution could
                combat dangerous hospital-acquired infections and ensured long-term antimicrobial
                activity in textiles. According to the TEM results, the Silver Shell™
                solution had a core–shell structure, and with chitosan, formed a protective
                shell around silver microparticles. The coating quality of the fabrics was
                investigated by FESEM before and after multiple wash cycles, indicating highly
                durable washing fastness. The AATCC-100 antibacterial results indicated a 100%
                reduction for two types of bacteria, S. aureus and E. coli, even after 75 wash cycles. The antibacterial
                results for the coated samples without using a crosslinking agent exhibited 99.88%
                and 99.81% reductions for S. aureus and E.
                    coli, respectively, after 50 wash cycles. To investigate the leaching
                properties of the coated samples with Silver ShellTM solution and study
                the effect of the crosslinking agent, AATCC-147 was performed. Despite the
                remarkable antibacterial efficacy of coated samples, even after 75 washing cycles,
                the crosslinking agent minimized the release of submicron particles from the fabric.
                Additionally, the results of AATCC-100 on non-pathogenic E. coli MG1655 and
                extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing ESBL41 and ESBL146 showed up to a
                99.99% reduction in all tested strains. According to the results of color
                measurements, uniform coatings were obtained in different samples. Fixation values
                of SS26 samples showed 44%, 32%, and 28% following 25, 50, and 75 washing cycles,
                respectively. For AgMP034, the %Fixation values were higher than SS26 and calculated
                at 54%, 44%, and 32% for the same sequence of washing cycles. The presence of
                chitosan surrounding the silver particles might have been the reason for the higher
                fixation values for AgMP034.

## 4. Materials and Methods

## 4.1. Materials

The fabrics used in this study were LS Bleached Cotton Muslin (120 GSM) from
                    Joanne Fabrics. These fabrics were coated with two types of batches. The first
                    was Silver ShellTM batch SS26 obtained from Chitozan Health LLC and
                    produced at a facility in Chesterfield, UK. The second one was Silver Shell
                    TM batch AgMP034 obtained from Chitozan Health LLC, Rochester, NY, USA.
                    The fabrics were coated with AgMP034 and SS26, along with Glutaraldehyde
                    (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) as a crosslinking agent. Non-ionic
                    surfactant NP-9 (Pfaltz & Bauer, Waterbury, CT, USA) was used for
                    wettability improvement. To investigate the effect of the crosslinking agent,
                    one sample, coded as A34, utilized the same batch of AgMP034 but without adding
                    a crosslinking agent during the coating process. The synthesis and coating
                    process employed in this study is proprietary of the Chitozan Health LLC and
                    utilizes silver chloride crystals suspended in a chitosan solution with
                    adjustable sizes from 50 to 350 nm. Tryptic Soy agar was purchased from Merck,
                    Germany. LB was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. AATCC 1993 standard reference
                    detergent was used for washing the samples.

## 4.2. Characterization of Silver Shell™ Solutions

The phase identification of thin-film samples containing core–shell
                    microparticles was conducted based on powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) data
                    (Bruker D2 PHASER diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation over a 2θ range of 5–65° and step size
                    of 0.02°). A transmission electron microscope JEM100CX-II (JEOL, Ltd.,
                    Tokyo, Japan) operated at 100 kV was used to study the core–shell
                    microparticles. Moreover, the elemental composition was analyzed by a
                    transmission electron microscope (Hitachi-SU9000EA) equipped with
                    energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. A drop of a solution was placed on a
                    copper grid and dried overnight at room temperature.

## 4.3. Coating Procedure

A total of 50 g of coating solution with 7 drops of a 10% NP-9 surfactant
                    solution were blended with 3.75 g of a 5% glutaraldehyde solution (0.375 g of
                    glutaraldehyde per 1 g of chitosan). The swatches (20 in × 20 in) were
                    placed into the solution and swished around to absorb as much solution as
                    possible. After full saturation, the wet swatches were removed and wrung tightly
                    (~3 times) to remove excess liquid. The residual liquid was removed by placing
                    the swatches between paper towels and rolling a rubber roller over the entire
                    surface. The samples were left at room temperature (24 °C) for 5 days to
                    dry completely.

## 4.4. Characterization of Coated Fabrics

## 4.4.1. Surface Morphology

The surface morphology of the uncoated and coated fabrics was observed by
                        field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) using a Thermo Fisher
                        Scientific (FEI) Teneo. The Teneo is equipped with energy-dispersive
                        spectroscopy (EDX) that provides elemental analysis. The samples underwent
                        gold coating for improved imaging using the SPI-Module Sputter coater
                        instrument for one minute.

## 4.4.2. Color Measurements

The color coordinates of CIE lab (L*, a*, and b*) for both untreated cotton
                        and Silver Shell™ coated samples were conducted at 5 different
                        places of each one using a Macbeth Color Eye 7000A Spectrophotometer. L* is
                        related to lightness, a* is a reddish/greenish factor, and b* corresponds to
                        the yellowness/bluish factor [
                        46].

The color strength (K/S) of the samples coated with Silver Shell™ was
                        also measured at all wavelengths from 400 to 700 nm (10 nm interval). This
                        value was reported for each sample at 370 nm, which was the maximum
                        absorbency wavelength. The color strength value was determined through the
                        color matching software’s internal computations by employing the
                        Kubelka–Munk equation [
                        47]:
                            (2)
                            
                                
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                    K
                                                
                                                
                                                    S
                                                
                                            
                                        
                                        
                                            =
                                            
                                                
                                                    
                                                        
                                                            
                                                                
                                                                    1
                                                                    −
                                                                    R
                                                                
                                                            
                                                        
                                                        
                                                            2
                                                        
                                                    
                                                
                                                
                                                    2
                                                    R
                                                
                                            
                                        
                                        ,
                                    
                                
                            
                        \nwhere
                        K represents absorption, S denotes scattering, and R stands for reflectance.

## 4.4.3. Antimicrobial Fabric Test

To analyze the antibacterial properties of the silver fabric coating against
                        uncoated controls, AATCC Test Method 100–2012 was performed. Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 6538) and E. coli (ATCC 10536) were used as the main test
                        organisms. Uncoated and silver-coated fabric samples were cut as circular
                        swatches, 4.8 cm in diameter. Four swatches were soaked with 1 mL of
                        inoculum, containing approximately 106 CFU, and placed in sterile
                        100 mL glass jars. Swatches soaked with 1 mL of sterile PBS were used as
                        controls.

Jars were divided into groups: one with zero-time incubation time to quantify
                        the initial number of viable cells, and another with overnight incubation.
                        In the zero-time incubation group, 100 mL of sterile PBS was added
                        immediately after placing the bacteria-inoculated swatches. After vigorous
                        shaking, we made serial dilutions of 1/1, 1/10, 1/100, and 1/1000 from 100
                        µL of the PBS wash of the swatches. Then, 100 µL of each
                        dilution was spread on agar plates in duplicates. Inoculated plates were
                        incubated overnight at 37 °C. The colonies were counted to estimate
                        the densities of viable cells in colony-forming units (CFU) per mL of
                        solution (CFU/mL).

A group of jars with overnight incubation was first incubated overnight at 37
                        °C and then underwent the same serial dilution procedure as the
                        zero-time group to establish the cell densities (CFU/mL).

The resulting CFU on agar plates were counted manually and the percentage of
                        reduction (R) was calculated as follows:
                            (3)
                            
                                
                                    
                                        R
                                        %
                                        =
                                        
                                            
                                                (
                                                B
                                                −
                                                A
                                                )
                                            
                                            
                                                B
                                            
                                        
                                        ×
                                        100
                                    
                                
                            
                        \nwhere
                        A is the colony-forming units (CFU/mL) coated fabrics after 24 h and B is
                        the mean of the CFU counted from control samples and coated samples at
                        zero-time contact.

To compare the antibacterial properties toward non-pathogenic and pathogenic
                        strains of the same species, we used the MG1655 model E.
                        coli strain (ATCC 29213) and multidrug-resistant clinical isolate
                        from the Sysoeva lab collection (extended-spectrum b-lactamase-producing
                        ESBL41 and ESBL146 strains (Lopatkin et al., 2016)). The loading of the
                        swatches, incubations, and plating for the CFU counting were done
                        analogously to the procedure for other strains as described. Initially, the
                        cell cultures of E. coli strains in LB were
                        grown for 24 h, reaching an OD of 2.6–3.8 (measured by
                        spectrophotometer Genesys 50), which is equivalent to about 2.6–3.8
                        × 108 CFU/mL. Cells were diluted to bring them to 10
                        6 CFU/mL to load 10
                            6 per 5 swatches in 1 mL of solution.

To investigate the leaching of fabric silver coating against uncoated
                        controls, we used AATCC Test Method 147–2016. Using a wire loop,
                        test microorganisms (S. aureus and E. coli) were streaked on agar plate in 5 streaks
                        spaced approximately 1 cm apart from each other. For each agar plate, the
                        wire loop was submerged only once. As a result, each lower streak contained
                        fewer CFU than the upper one. Plates were done in duplicates. After that,
                        rectangular swatches (25 mm × 50 mm) were pressed on the streak
                        inoculum, and the plates were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. After
                        incubation, the bacterial growths under and on the edges of the fabric were
                        investigated.

**Keywords:**
antibacterial coatings, gels, biomedical textiles, chitosan, silver microparticles

**Funding Sources:**
  - Award ID: R41AI172693

**Copyright:** © 2024 by the authors.

## References

1. Jena P., Mohanty S., Mallick R., Jacob B., Sonawane A.. Toxicity and antibacterial assessment of chitosan-coated silver
                        nanoparticles on human pathogens and macrophage cells. *Int. J. Nanomed.*. 2012;7:1805-1818. DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S28077
2. Canama G.J.C., Delco M.C.L., Talandron R.A., Tan N.P.. Synthesis
                    of Chitosan-Silver Nanocomposite and Its Evaluation as an Antibacterial Coating
                    for Mobile Phone Glass Protectors. *ACS Omega*. 2023;8:17699-17711. DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.3c00191
3. Ikuta K.S., Swetschinski L.R., Aguilar G.R., Sharara F., Mestrovic T., Gray A.P., Weaver N.D., E Wool E., Han C., Hayoon A.G.. Global mortality associated with 33 bacterial
                    pathogens in 2019: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
                    2019. *Lancet*. 2022;400:2221-2248. DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(22)02185-7
4. Hicks A.L., Reed R.B., Theis T.L., Hanigan D., Huling H., Zaikova T., Hutchison J.E., Miller J.. Environmental impacts of reusable nanoscale silver-coated
                        hospital gowns compared to single-use, disposable gowns. *Environ. Sci. Nano*. 2016;3:1124-1132. DOI: 10.1039/c6en00168h
5. Gonçalves R.A., Ku J.W.K., Zhang H., Salim T., Oo G., Zinn A.A., Boothroyd C., Tang R.M.Y., Gan C.L., Gan Y.-H.. Copper-Nanoparticle-Coated Fabrics for Rapid and Sustained
                        Antibacterial Activity Applications. *ACS Appl. Nano Mater.*. 2022;5:12876-12886. DOI: 10.1021/acsanm.2c02736
6. Qiu H., Si Z., Luo Y., Feng P., Wu X., Hou W., Zhu Y., Chan-Park M.B., Xu L., Huang D.. The
                    mechanisms and the applications of antibacterial polymers in surface
                        modification on medical devices. *Front. Bioeng.
                    Biotechnol.*. 2020;8:-. DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00910
7. Balakumaran M.D., Ramachandran R., Jagadeeswari S., Kalaichelvan P.T.. In vitro biological properties and characterization of nanosilver
                        coated cotton fabrics—An application for antimicrobial textile
                        finishing. *Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad.*. 2016;107:48-55. DOI: 10.1016/j.ibiod.2015.11.011
8. Botelho C.M., Fernandes M.M., Souza J.M., Dias N., Sousa A.M., Teixeira J.A., Fangueiro R., Zille A.. New textile for personal protective equipment—Plasma
                        chitosan/silver nanoparticles nylon fabric. *Fibers*. 2021;9:-. DOI: 10.3390/fib9010003
9. El-Rafie M., Ahmed H.B., Zahran M.. Characterization
                    of nanosilver coated cotton fabrics and evaluation of its antibacterial efficacy. *Carbohydr.
                    Polym.*. 2014;107:174-181. DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.02.024
10. Gadkari R.R., Ali S.W., Joshi M., Rajendran S., Das A., Alagirusamy R.. Leveraging
                    antibacterial efficacy of silver loaded chitosan nanoparticles on layer-by-layer
                    self-assembled coated cotton fabric. *Int. J. Biol.
                    Macromol.*. 2020;162:548-560. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.06.137
11. Petkova P., Francesko A., Perelshtein I., Gedanken A., Tzanov T.. Simultaneous
                    sonochemical-enzymatic coating of medical textiles with antibacterial ZnO
                    nanoparticles. *Ultrason. Sonochemistry*. 2016;29:244-250. DOI: 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2015.09.021
12. Zheng Y., Xiao M., Jiang S., Ding F., Wang J.. Coating
                    fabrics with gold nanorods for colouring, UV-protection, and antibacterial
                    functions. *Nanoscale*. 2013;5:788-795. DOI: 10.1039/c2nr33064d
13. El-Naggar M.E., Shaarawy S., Hebeish A.. Bactericidal
                    finishing of loomstate, scoured and bleached cotton fibres via sustainable
                    in-situ synthesis of silver nanoparticles. *Int. J. Biol.
                    Macromol.*. 2018;106:1192-1202. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.08.127
14. Shcherbakov A.B., Reukov V.V., Yakimansky A.V., Krasnopeeva E.L., Ivanova O.S., Popov A.L., Ivanov V.K.. CeO2 nanoparticle-containing polymers for biomedical applications: A
                    review. *Polymers*. 2021;13:-. DOI: 10.3390/polym13060924
15. Qian J., Dong Q., Chun K., Zhu D., Zhang X., Mao Y., Culver J.N., Tai S., German J.R., Dean D.P.. Highly stable, antiviral, antibacterial cotton
                    textiles via molecular engineering. *Nat. Nanotechnol.*. 2023;18:168-176. DOI: 10.1038/s41565-022-01278-y
16. Gulati R., Sharma S., Sharma R.K.. Antimicrobial textile: Recent developments and functional
                        perspective. *Polym. Bull.*. 2022;79:5747-5771. DOI: 10.1007/s00289-021-03826-3
17. Li Y., Miao Q., Wang X.. Antibacterial capability of air filter fiber materials treated
                        with triclosan against indoor environmental microbes. *Atmosphere*. 2022;13:-. DOI: 10.3390/atmos13071104
18. Shrestha P., Zhang Y., Chen W.J., Wong T.Y.. Triclosan: Antimicrobial mechanisms, antibiotics interactions,
                        clinical applications, and human health. *J. Environ. Sci. Health Part C*. 2020;38:245-268. DOI: 10.1080/26896583.2020.1809286
19. Qian L., Sun G.. Durable and regenerable antimicrobial textiles: Improving
                        efficacy and durability of biocidal functions. *J. Appl. Polym. Sci.*. 2004;91:2588-2593. DOI: 10.1002/app.13428
20. Ma Y., Aslam M.Z., Wu M., Nitin N., Sun G.. Strategies
                    and perspectives of developing anti-biofilm materials for improved food safety. *Food
                    Res. Int.*. 2022;159:111543-. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2022.111543
21. Sun X., Zhang L., Cao Z., Deng Y., Liu L., Fong H., Sun Y.. Electrospun
                    composite nanofiber fabrics containing uniformly dispersed antimicrobial agents
                    as an innovative type of polymeric materials with superior antimicrobial
                        efficacy. *ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces*. 2010;2:952-956. DOI: 10.1021/am100018k
22. Saverina E.A., Frolov N.A., Kamanina O.A., Arlyapov V.A., Vereshchagin A.N., Ananikov V.P.. From
                    Antibacterial to Antibiofilm Targeting: An Emerging Paradigm Shift in the
                    Development of Quaternary Ammonium Compounds (QACs). *ACS
                    Infect. Dis.*. 2023;9:394-422. DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.2c00469
23. Wang P., Zhang M., Qu J., Wang L., Geng J., Fu F., Liu X.. Antibacterial cotton fabric prepared by a “grafting
                        to” strategy using a QAC copolymer. *Cellulose*. 2022;29:3569-3581. DOI: 10.1007/s10570-022-04469-x
24. Yueh M.-F., Tukey R.H.. Triclosan:
                    A widespread environmental toxicant with many biological effects. *Annu.
                    Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.*. 2016;56:251-272. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-010715-103417
25. Reshma A., Priyadarisini V., Amutha K.. Sustainable antimicrobial finishing of fabrics using natural
                        bioactive agents—A review. *Int. J. Life Sci. Pharma Res.*. 2018;8:10-20. DOI: 10.22376/ijpbs/lpr.2018.8.4.l10-20
26. Yıldırım F.F., Avinc O., Yavas A., Sevgisunar G.. Sustainable antifungal and antibacterial textiles using natural
                        resources. *Sustainability in the Textile and Apparel Industries: Sourcing Natural
                        Raw Materials*. 2020;:111-179. DOI: 
27. Tanasa F., Teaca C.-A., Nechifor M., Ignat M., Duceac I.A., Ignat L.. Highly Specialized Textiles with Antimicrobial
                        Functionality—Advances and Challenges. *Textiles*. 2023;3:219-245. DOI: 10.3390/textiles3020015
28. Vertuccio L., Guadagno L., D’angelo A., Viola V., Raimondo M., Catauro M.. Sol-gel synthesis of caffeic acid entrapped in
                        silica/polyethylene glycol based organic-inorganic hybrids: Drug delivery
                        and biological properties. *Appl. Sci.*. 2023;13:-. DOI: 10.3390/app13042164
29. Catauro M., D’Angelo A., Fiorentino M., Pacifico S., Latini A., Brutti S., Ciprioti S.V.. Thermal, spectroscopic characterization and evaluation of
                        antibacterial and cytotoxicity properties of quercetin-PEG-silica hybrid
                        materials. *Ceram. Int.*. 2023;49:14855-14863. DOI: 10.1016/j.ceramint.2022.07.256
30. Tan L., Sin L.T., Bee S., Ratnam C.T., Woo K., Tee T., Rahmat A.R.. A review of antimicrobial fabric containing nanostructures
                        metal-based compound. *J. Vinyl Addit. Technol.*. 2019;25:E3-E27. DOI: 10.1002/vnl.21606
31. Sfameni S., Hadhri M., Rando G., Drommi D., Rosace G., Trovato V., Plutino M.R.. Inorganic finishing for textile fabrics: Recent advances in
                        wear-resistant, UV protection and antimicrobial treatments. *Inorganics*. 2023;11:-. DOI: 10.3390/inorganics11010019
32. Feng Q.L., Wu J., Chen G.Q., Cui F.Z., Kim T.N., Kim J.O.. A
                    mechanistic study of the antibacterial effect of silver ions on Escherichia
                    aureus and Staphylococcus aureus. *J. Biomed. Mater. Res.*. 2000;52:662-668. DOI: 10.1002/1097-4636(20001215)52:4<662::AID-JBM10>3.0.CO;2-3
33. Yin I.X., Zhang J., Zhao I.S., Mei M.L., Li Q., Chu C.H.. The
                    antibacterial mechanism of silver nanoparticles and its application in dentistry. *Int.
                    J. Nanomed.*. 2020;15:2555-2562. DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S246764
34. Bektas N., Şenel B., Yenilmez E., Özatik O., Arslan R.. Evaluation
                    of wound healing effect of chitosan-based gel formulation containing vitexin. *Saudi
                    Pharm. J.*. 2020;28:87-94. DOI: 10.1016/j.jsps.2019.11.008
35. Sánchez R., Alonso G., Valencia C., Franco J.. Rheological and TGA study of acylated chitosan gel-like
                        dispersions in castor oil: Influence of acyl substituent and acylation
                        protocol. *Chem. Eng. Res. Des.*. 2015;100:170-178. DOI: 10.1016/j.cherd.2015.05.022
36. Mohammadi H., Alihosseini F., Hosseini S.A.. Improving
                    physical and biological properties of nylon monofilament as suture by
                    Chitosan/Hyaluronic acid. *Int. J. Biol. Macromol.*. 2020;164:3394-3402. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.08.081
37. Kumar-Krishnan S., Prokhorov E., Hernández-Iturriaga M., Mota-Morales J.D., Vázquez-Lepe M., Kovalenko Y., Sanchez I.C., Luna-Bárcenas G.. Chitosan/silver nanocomposites: Synergistic antibacterial action
                        of silver nanoparticles and silver ions. *Eur. Polym. J.*. 2015;67:242-251. DOI: 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2015.03.066
38. Grgac S.F., Tarbuk A., Dekanić T., Sujka W., Draczyński Z.. The
                    chitosan implementation into cotton and polyester/cotton blend fabrics. *Materials*. 2020;13:-. DOI: 10.3390/ma13071616
39. El-tahlawy K.F., El-Bendary M.A., Elhendawy A.G., Hudson S.M.. The antimicrobial activity of cotton fabrics treated with
                        different crosslinking agents and chitosan. *Carbohydr. Polym.*. 2005;60:421-430. DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2005.02.019
40. Cao X.L., Cheng C., Ma Y.L., Zhao C.S.. Preparation
                    of silver nanoparticles with antimicrobial activities and the researches of
                        their biocompatibilities. *J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med.*. 2010;21:2861-2868. DOI: 10.1007/s10856-010-4133-2
41. Wei D., Sun W., Qian W., Ye Y., Ma X.. The
                    synthesis of chitosan-based silver nanoparticles and their antibacterial
                        activity. *Carbohydr. Res.*. 2009;344:2375-2382. DOI: 10.1016/j.carres.2009.09.001
42. Rezazadeh N.H., Buazar F., Matroodi S.. Synergistic
                    effects of combinatorial chitosan and polyphenol biomolecules on enhanced
                    antibacterial activity of biofunctionalized silver nanoparticles. *Sci.
                    Rep.*. 2020;10:19615-. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-76726-7
43. Nithya A., JeevaKumari H.L., Rokesh K., Ruckmani K., Jeganathan K., Jothivenkatachalam K.. A
                    versatile effect of chitosan-silver nanocomposite for surface plasmonic
                    photocatalytic and antibacterial activity. *J. Photochem.
                    Photobiol. B Biol.*. 2015;153:412-422. DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2015.10.020
44. Mollick S., Islam T., Miah R., Riad M.H., Chakrabarty T., Hossen T., Islam T.. Development of Antibacterial Cotton Fabric Utilizing
                        Microencapsulation Technique from Dragon Fruit Peel Extract. *Fibers Polym.*. 2023;24:3937-3945. DOI: 10.1007/s12221-023-00353-y
45. Safi M., Gheisar F., Najafi F., Hadavand B.S.. Investigation of Shade Darkening Property of Polydimethylsiloxane
                        and Poly (Dimethyl/Diphenyl Siloxane) Modified with Amino Groups on Dyed
                        Textiles. *Fibers Polym.*. 2023;24:4213-4227. DOI: 10.1007/s12221-023-00395-2
46. Emam H.E., Rehan M., Mashaly H.M., Ahmed H.B.. Large scaled strategy for natural/synthetic fabrics
                        functionalization via immediate assembly of AgNPs. *Dye. Pigment.*. 2016;133:173-183. DOI: 10.1016/j.dyepig.2016.06.005
47. Rai S., Saremi R., Sharma S., Minko S.. Environment-friendly nanocellulose-indigo dyeing of textiles. *Green Chem.*. 2021;23:7937-7944. DOI: 10.1039/d1gc02043a
