# Particle concentrations in urban microenvironments.

**Authors:** J I Levy, E A Houseman, L Ryan, D Richardson, J D Spengler

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 11102296
- Pmc: PMC1240162
- Pii: sc271_5_1835

**Categories:**
- Research Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Ppub: 11-2000

## Abstract

Although ambient particulate matter has been associated with a range of health
                    outcomes, the health risks for individuals depend in part on their daily
                    activities. Information about particle mass concentrations and size
                    distributions in indoor and outdoor microenvironments can help identify
                    high-risk individuals and the significant contributors to personal exposure. To
                    address these issues in an urban setting, we measured particle count
                    concentrations in four size ranges and particulate matter (3/4) 10 microm
                    (PM(10)) concentrations outdoors and in seven indoor microenvironments in
                    Boston, Massachusetts. Particle counts and PM(10) concentrations were
                    continuously measured with two light-scattering devices. Because of the
                    autocorrelation between sequential measurements, we used linear mixed effects
                    models with an AR-1 autoregressive correlation structure to evaluate whether
                    differences between microenvironments were statistically significant. In
                    general, larger particles were elevated in the vicinity of significant human
                    activity, and smaller particles were elevated in the vicinity of combustion
                    sources, with indoor PM(10) concentrations significantly higher than the
                    outdoors on buses and trolleys. Statistical models demonstrated significant
                    variability among some indoor microenvironments, with greater variability for
                    smaller particles. These findings imply that personal exposures can depend on
                    activity patterns and that microenvironmental concentration information can
                    improve the accuracy of personal exposure estimation.
