# Role of CT in the detection and staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma

**Authors:** Isaac R Francis

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 18211854
- Pmc: PMC1434521
- Other: CI30026
- Doi: 10.1102/1470-7330.2003.0026
- Other: jCI.v4.i1.pg10
- Other: ci030026

**Categories:**
- Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Collection: 2004
- Epub: 1-10-2003

## Abstract

In this review article, the roles of imaging with CT and MRI in the detection and
                    staging of pancreatic carcinoma will be discussed. The frequently employed
                    techniques using these modalities, the common imaging appearances of this tumor,
                    and the limitations of imaging will be addressed.

## Introduction

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the most common non-endocrine malignancy of the pancreas
                and is the 4th leading cause of death is the United States. Most tumors arise in the
                head of the pancreas, and account for between 60 and 70% of cases [1–4].
                Despite the recent advances in imaging and treatment, pancreatic adenocarcinoma
                continues to be a lethal disease. While newer diagnostic techniques have improved
                the accuracy for detecting these tumors, no significant inroads have been made in
                finding ‘early’ cancers. Most tumors are diagnosed late and
                approximately 85% of tumors are unresectable at the time of diagnosis. There
                are many reasons for this fact, but pancreatic carcinoma is unique in several
                respects: 
                    
                         (1) Symptoms manifest late 
                    
                    
                         (2) Early extrapancreatic spread of tumor 
                    
                    
                         (3) Rapid downhill course from diagnosis to death.

## Role of imaging

The role of imaging in patients with suspected pancreatic carcinoma is: 
                    
                        (1) Confirm and stage tumor 
                                
                                    (a) Determine if tumor is resectable or not 
                                
                                
                                    (b) Exclude pancreatic carcinoma in patients with symptoms
                suggestive of disease.

## TNM staging

While the criteria for unresectability vary from center to center, the presence of
                distant disease (metastases), local tumor extension, documented regional or distant
                lymph node metastases, and arterial invasion or encasement of major mesenteric
                arteries (celiac, hepatic, superior mesenteric artery) are generally accepted as
                criteria of unresectability. Venous involvement of the major mesenteric veins
                (superior mesenteric vein and portal vein) is not universally accepted as a
                criterion of unresectability as surgeons are performing en-block venous resection
                and venous reconstructions.

## Computed tomography (CT) techniques

CT techniques in assessment of patients with suspected pancreatic carcinoma usually
                involve the use of thin section dynamic contrast-enhanced helical CT obtained during
                the rapid bolus injection of large amounts of iodinated urographic contrast.

The introduction of multidetector-row scanners has facilitated the acquisition of
                images during multiple phases of intravenous contrast administration. Utilization of
                a pancreatic parenchymal phase, using a scan delay of 40 s has resulted in superior
                pancreatic parenchymal enhancement. In some studies, this has led to superior
                tumor-to-parenchymal contrast differences, facilitating superior tumor detection,
                when compared to portal venous or delayed phases of imaging [5–9]. The
                information obtained from these multiphase exams was used to generate 3D images of
                the arterial, venous and pancreatico-biliary anatomy [10–14]. These in
                select cases are useful for surgical planning (Fig. 1
                ).

## CT appearances

Most pancreatic adenocarcinomas are of lower attenuation than the normally enhancing
                pancreatic parenchyma in all phases of contrast enhancement (Fig. 2). About 10% of pancreatic adenocarcinomas can be
                isoattenuating on CT. Pancreatic and bile duct dilatation are also common findings,
                as is atrophy proximal to the tumor. Perivascular tumor extension which leads to
                vascular involvement and arterial or venous encasement are also hallmarks of this
                tumor. In pancreatitis (either acute or chronic), they are usually streaky
                ill-defined areas of perivascular infiltration, whereas with pancreatic carcinoma it
                is usually seen as a ‘cuff’ of soft tissue encasing the
                peripancreatic vessels.

## CT: tumor detection and staging

While CT is excellent in detecting unresectable tumors (>90%
                accuracy), it frequently understages true tumor extent and even with early helical
                CT, the accuracy for assessing resectability was only around 70% [4]. With the use of newer multislice helical CT
                scanners, tumor detection rates have improved to around 90–95%.
                However only small improvements have been seen for determining resectability status.
                The most recent studies using multislice scanners have shown that positive
                predictive values for resectability are slightly above 80% [5, 7, 8]. Reasons for this include the continued poor
                sensitivity for the detection of small peritoneal and liver metastases, metastases
                in normal sized lymph nodes and subtle peripancreatic tumor extension.

## Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques

Current MR techniques using phased-array torso coils, thin slices, and dynamic
                gadolinium-enhanced breath-hold gradient-echo (GRE) sequences are optimal for
                imaging pancreatic carcinoma, and in some studies have outperformed CT especially in
                the detection of smaller tumors. The sequences that are most helpful for the
                detection of pancreatic carcinoma are the T1-weighted fat-suppressed and
                gadolinium-enhanced GRE sequences. On the T1-weighted fat-suppressed images, the
                pancreas usually due to its proteinaceous content is of high signal intensity, while
                the tumor is of low signal intensity. On the gadolinium-enhanced GRE images,
                pancreatic carcinomas enhance less than the surrounding parenchyma (Fig. 3) [15
                –19]. Mangafodipir trisodium-enhanced
                MRI has also demonstrated that when compared to contrast-enhanced CT, it was as
                accurate for the detection and staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and slightly
                superior to it for the detection of small tumors and metastases [20, 21].

The added ability to perform magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (Fig. 4), as well as the ability to assess
                vascular involvement with use of magnetic resonance angiography, makes MRI an
                invaluable tool in providing a comprehensive evaluation of patients with pancreatic
                carcinoma, assessing local tumor extent, peripancreatic vessel involvement,
                pancreatico-biliary duct anatomy, as well as for distant metastases [22, 23].

## Vascular invasion

## Arterial involvement

The most common vessels involved are the celiac axis, splenic artery, and
                    superior mesenteric artery. Major arterial encasement is seen as soft tissue
                    infiltration along the vessels resulting in a soft tissue ‘cuff’
                    or the appearance of a thickened vessel (Fig. 5).
                    This finding is not specific for tumor invasion as rarely, pancreatitis may
                    present with a similar appearance. This vascular encasement and retropancreatic
                    invasion into the celiac plexus results in the back pain that these patients
                    often present with.

## Venous involvement

The most common veins involved are splenic vein, superior mesenteric vein and the
                    portal vein (Fig. 6). Venous invasion can
                    be suggested if the vein is attenuated or changes its caliber. The superior
                    mesenteric vein when attenuated by a tumor assumes a ‘tear-drop’
                    appearance. This sign has a high specificity for unresectability (85%) [24]. Another indirect sign of venous
                    involvement is the presence of dilated peripancreatic collaterals. In late
                    stages, venous occlusion and thrombosis may also be seen.

In the last several years, attention has been focused on the small veins of the
                    pancreatic arcades. These veins are usually small, and lie dorsal and ventral to
                    the head and uncinate process of the pancreas. When there is a tumor compressing
                    the tributaries of the superior mesenteric vein or portal vein, these veins get
                    dilated. This sign can be an indirect and early sign of an unresectable tumor [25].

## Predicting resectability based on tumor contact with peripancreatic vessels

Several CT studies have been performed to determine if the degree of contact of a
                tumor with the adjacent major peripancreatic arteries and veins could be used to
                predict if a tumor could be resected or not. These studies have shown that if there
                is a clear fat plane or normal pancreatic parenchyma interposed between the tumor
                and these vessels, in almost all instances the tumor is resectable. If there was
                tumor contact of 
                    \\documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \\usepackage{wasysym}
                \\usepackage[substack]{amsmath} \\usepackage{amsfonts,amssymb,amsbsy}
                \\usepackage[mathscr]{eucal} \\usepackage{mathrsfs}
                \\DeclareFontFamily{T1}{linotext}{}
                \\DeclareFontShape{T1}{linotext}{m}{n}{<-> linotext}{}
                \\DeclareSymbolFont{linotext}{T1}{linotext}{m}{n}
                \\DeclareSymbolFontAlphabet{\\mathLINOTEXT}{linotext} \\begin{document} ${\\leqslant
                }180^{\\circ }$ \\end{document}
                , then
                the likelihood of resectability was high and if the degree of tumor contact was
                greater than 180∘, it was most likely unresectable [26, 27].

## CT vs. MR—which modality is superior?

Recent studies have tried to compare the two techniques and have come up with
                divergent results. In some studies MR was superior to CT and in others the reverse
                was true. Due to the rapid changes in imaging technology, these results are
                short-lived [15, 16]. It remains to be seen if ultra thin-section dynamic
                contrast-enhanced multislice CT and dynamic breath-held gadolinium-enhanced 3D
                volume acquisitions will translate into improved tumor detection and staging.

## Limitations of imaging methods

The most common reasons for understaging by imaging are the inability to detect: 
                    
                         (1) Metastases to normal sized lymph nodes 
                    
                    
                         (2) Small peritoneal metastases 
                    
                    
                         (3) Small <1 cm hepatic metastases 
                    
                    
                         (4) Subtle peripancreatic tumor extension.

Most metastatic lymph nodes are <1 cm and this poses a problem for current
                imaging techniques as size criteria are the only method we currently have to
                distinguish between benign and malignant nodes. Using ultra-small iron-oxide
                particles for lymph node imaging with MR may offer a solution in the future.
                Peritoneal metastases are recognized only when in an advanced stage and small
                metastatic deposits still go undetected. Similarly the sensitivity for CT and MR in
                detecting small subcentimeter surface liver metastases is poor.

**Keywords:**
Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, pancreas neoplasms, pancreas CT, pancreas MRI

## References

1. Kalra MK, Maher MM, Sahani DV. Current status of imaging in pancreatic diseases. *J Comput Assist Tomogr*. 2002;26:661-75. PMID: 12439296.
2. Balci NC, Semelka RC. Radiologic diagnosis and staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. *Eur J Radiol*. 2001;38:105-12. PMID: 11335092.
3. Tamm E, Charnsangavej C. Pancreatic cancer: current concepts in imaging for diagnosis and
                        staging. *Cancer J*. 2001;7:298-311. PMID: 11561606.
4. Bluemke DA, Cameron JL, Hruban RH. Potentially curable pancreatic adenocarcinoma: spiral CT
                        assessment with surgical and pathologic correlation. *Radiology*. 1995;197:381-5. PMID: 7480681.
5. Diehl SJ, Lehmann KJ, Sadick M. Pancreatic cancer: value of dual-phase helical CT in assessing
                        resectability. *Radiology*. 1998;206:373-8. PMID: 9457188.
6. O’Malley ME, Boland GW, Wood BL. Adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas: determination of
                        surgical unresectability with thin-section pancreatic-phase helical CT. *Am J Roentgenol*. 1999;173:1513-8. PMID: 10584794.
7. Valls C, Sanchez AE, Fabregat J. Dual-phase helical CT of pancreatic adenocarcinoma: assessment of
                        resectability before surgery. *Am J Roentgenol*. 2002;178:821-6. PMID: 11906855.
8. Laghi A, Iannaccone R, Catalone C. Multislice spiral computed tomography in diagnosis and staging of
                        pancreatic carcinoma: preliminary experience. *Dig Liv Dis*. 2002;34:732-8.
9. Prokesch RW, Chow LC, Beaulieu CF. Isoattenuating pancreatic adenocarcinoma at multidetector-row CT:
                        secondary signs. *Radiology*. 2002;224:764-8. PMID: 12202711.
10. Prokesch RW, Chow LC, Beaulieu CF. Local staging of pancreatic carcinoma with multidetector-row CT:
                        use of curved planar reformations—initial experience. *Radiology*. 2002;225:759-65. PMID: 12461258.
11. Catalano C, Laghi A, Fraioli F. Pancreatic carcinoma: the role of high resolution multislice
                        spiral CT in the diagnosis and assessment of resectability. *Eur Radiol*. 2003;13:149-56. PMID: 12541123.
12. Horton KM, Fishman EK. Multidetector CT angiography of pancreatic carcinoma: part I:
                        evaluation of arterial involvement. *Am J Roentgenol*. 2002;178:827-32. PMID: 11906856.
13. Horton KM, Fishman EK. Multidetector CT angiography of pancreatic carcinoma: part II:
                        evaluation of venous involvement. *Am J Roentgenol*. 2002;178:833-6. PMID: 11906858.
14. Johnson PT, Heath DG, Hofmann LV. Multidetector-row computed tomography with three-dimensional
                        volume rendering of pancreatic cancer: a complete preoperative staging toll
                        using computed tomography angiography and volume-rendered
                        cholangiopancreatography. *J Comput Assist Tomogr*. 2003;27:347-53. PMID: 12794597.
15. Irie H, Honda H, Kaneko K. Comparison of helical CT and MR imaging in detecting and staging
                        small pancreatic adenocarcinoma. *Abdom Imaging*. 1997;22:429-33. PMID: 9157866.
16. Arslan A, Buanes T, Geitung JT. Pancreatic carcinoma: MR, MR angiography, and dynamic helical CT
                        in the evaluation of vascular invasion. *Eur J Radiol*. 2001;38:151-9. PMID: 11335098.
17. Obuz F, Dicle O, Coker A. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma: detection and staging with dynamic MR
                        imaging. *Eur J Radiol*. 2001;38:146-50. PMID: 11335097.
18. Robinson PA. The role of MRI in pancreatic cancer. *Eur Radiol*. 2002;12:267-9. PMID: 11870421.
19. Fischer U, Vosshenrich R, Horstmann O. Preoperative local MRI-staging of patients with a suspected
                        pancreatic mass. *Eur Radiol*. 2002;12:296-303. PMID: 11870425.
20. Rieber A, Tomczak R, Nussle K. MRI with mangafodipir trisodium in the detection of pancreatic
                        tumors: comparison with helical CT. *Br J Radiol*. 2000;73:1165-9. PMID: 11144793.
21. Schima W, Fugger R, Schober E. Diagnosis and staging of pancreatic cancer: comparison of
                        mangafodipir trisodium-enhanced MR imaging and contrast-enhanced helical
                        hydro-CT. *Am J Roentgenol*. 2002;179:717-24. PMID: 12185052.
22. Lopez Hanninen E, Amthauer H, Hosten N. Prospective evaluation of pancreatic tumors: accuracy of MR
                        imaging with MR cholangiopancreatography and MR angiography. *Radiology*. 2002;224:34-41. PMID: 12091659.
23. Schwartz LH, Lefkowitz RA, Panicek DM. Breath-hold magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography in the
                        evaluation of malignant pancreaticobiliary obstruction. *J Comput Assist Tomogr*. 2003;27:307-14. PMID: 12794591.
24. Hough TJ, Raptopoulos V, Sewert B. Tear-drop superior mesenteric vein: CT sign of unresectable
                        carcinoma of the pancreas. *Am J Roentgenol*. 1999;173:1509-12. PMID: 10584793.
25. Yamada Y, Mori H, Kiyosue H. CT assessment of the inferior peripancreatic veins: clinical
                        significance. *Am J Roentgenol*. 2000;174:677-84. PMID: 10701608.
26. Loyer EM, David CL, Dubrow RA. Vascular involvement in pancreatic adenocarcinoma: reassessment
                        by thin section CT. *Abdom Imaging*. 1996;21:202-6. PMID: 8661548.
27. Lu DS, Reber HA, Krasny RM. Local staging of pancreatic cancer: criteria for unresectability
                        of major vessels as revealed by pancreatic-phase, thin-section helical CT. *Am J Roentgenol*. 1997;168:1439-43. PMID: 9168704.
