# Room-temperature semiconductor detectors for in vivo monitoring of
                    internal contamination.

**Authors:** J L Genicot

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 9467055
- Pmc: PMC1469942

**Categories:**
- Research Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Ppub: 12-1997

## Abstract

In vivo monitoring of low-energy X-ray and gamma-ray emitters has always been a
                    difficult task, primarily because of lack of accuracy and the high detection
                    limits of classical techniques. Various types of PIN diodes (diodes with a large
                    intrinsic zone) were tested in the Radiation Protection Department of the Studie
                    Centrum voor Kernenergie, Centre d'étude de l'Energie Nucléaire
                    (Mol, Belgium) in the measurement of radioactive body burden by direct methods.
                    Current research is oriented toward the use of room-temperature diodes for the
                    detection of low-energy photons escaping the body. In this paper, a new counting
                    technique that involves a portable jacket containing the diodes is described.
                    The system uses silicon diodes and is used out of shielding room in order to be
                    near the contamination. With this method rapid analysis and long counting times
                    are possible, stress is reduced, and medical treatment can be optimized. CdZnTe
                    detectors were also evaluated for this measurement technique but this type of
                    detector is better adapted for counting inside a shielding room. The improvement
                    of the accuracy of the measurement, taking into account the effect of the ribs,
                    is described here, as well the associated electronics necessary for this type of
                    counting.

### Images

