# An application of conditional logistic regression and multifactor
                    dimensionality reduction for detecting gene-gene Interactions on risk of
                    myocardial infarction: The importance of model validation

**Authors:** Christopher S Coffey, Patricia R Hebert, Marylyn D Ritchie, Harlan M Krumholz, J Michael Gaziano, Paul M Ridker, Nancy J Brown, Douglas E Vaughan, Jason H Moore

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 15119966
- Pmc: PMC419697
- Publisher-id: 1471-2105-5-49
- Doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-5-49

**Categories:**
- Research Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Collection: 2004
- Epub: 30-4-2004

## Abstract

### Background

To examine interactions among the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
                        insertion/deletion, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1
                        ) 4G/5G, and tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA)
                        insertion/deletion gene polymorphisms on risk of myocardial infarction using
                        data from 343 matched case-control pairs from the Physicians Health Study.
                        We examined the data using both conditional logistic regression and the
                        multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method. One advantage of the MDR
                        method is that it provides an internal prediction error for validation. We
                        summarize our use of this internal prediction error for model validation.

### Results

The overall results for the two methods were consistent, with both suggesting
                        an interaction between the ACE I/D and PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphisms.
                        However, using ten-fold cross validation, the 46% prediction error for the
                        final MDR model was not significantly lower than that expected by chance.

### Conclusions

The significant interaction initially observed does not validate and may
                        represent a type I error. As data-driven analytic methods continue to be
                        developed and used to examine complex genetic interactions, it will become
                        increasingly important to stress model validation in order to ensure that
                        significant effects represent true relationships rather than chance
                        findings.

## Background

There is a growing awareness that the failure to replicate single-locus association
                studies for common complex diseases may be due to an underlying genetic architecture
                in which interactions between genes are the norm rather than the exception [1,2]. In
                fact, a recent review of 166 putative single-locus associations found that only six
                had been consistently replicated [3].

The angiotensin converting enzyme insertion/deletion (ACE I/D)
                polymorphism has been associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction
                (MI) in some but not all studies [4-8]. One possible explanation for the
                inconsistent results is that interaction with another gene or genes could modify the
                effect of the ACE DD genotype on the risk of MI. Accumulating
                evidence suggests that the renin-angiotensin system plays a role in regulating
                fibrinolytic balance, maintained primarily by the interplay of PAI-1 and t-PA levels
                [9,10].
                Either an increase in PAI-1 levels, which promote thrombosis, or a decrease in t-PA
                levels, which promote fibrinolysis, shifts the balance towards thrombosis. Hence, we
                report the results from a recent study to examine possible interactions between the ACE
                I/D, the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) 
                4G/5G, and the tissue plasminogen activator insertion/deletion (t-PA
                I/D) polymorphisms on risk of MI. An interaction between the ACE DD genotype
                and PAI-1 4G allele on risk of MI has been hypothesized as both are
                associated with increased PAI-1 levels [11-13] and recent evidence suggests an interaction
                between the two polymorphisms on plasma PAI-1 levels [14]. An interaction between the ACE DD and t-PA
                II genotypes on risk of MI has also been hypothesized since the ACE
                DD genotype is associated with an increased breakdown of bradykinin, a
                potent stimulus for t-PA release [15,16] and the t-PA II genotype
                has been postulated to interfere with t-PA release [
                17].

We used data from 343 matched case-control pairs in the Physicians' Health Study
                (PHS) to examine possible interactions among the bi-allelic ACE I/D
                , PAI-1 4G/5G, and t-PA I/D polymorphisms on the
                risk of MI. The standard analysis technique for such study designs is conditional
                logistic regression (CLR). However, it has been suggested that parameter estimates
                obtained from a logistic regression model may be unreliable unless 10–20
                events (cases) per variable are available [18].
                In the current study, a total of 19 parameters must be estimated in the maximum
                conditional logistic regression model under consideration, which considers all
                possible main effects and two-way interactions among three polymorphisms with three
                genotypes each (1 for the intercept, 2 each for the main effects of ACE
                , PAI-1, and t-PA, and 4 each for the ACE 
                × PAI-1, ACE × t-PA,
                and PAI-1 × t-PA interactions). With 343
                observed cases, this study has approximately 18 events per parameter in the full
                model and is thus on the outer limit of having an acceptable ratio of events to
                parameters in the model. Furthermore, even if the sample size is sufficient to
                provide adequate parameter estimates, the study may suffer from low power to detect
                clinically relevant interactions. For all of these reasons, when planning the
                current study, there were concerns regarding whether the planned conditional
                logistic regression analysis would provide adequate power to detect interactions of
                interest.

To guard against these concerns, we decided to apply the multifactor dimensionality
                reduction (MDR) method to this data set as well [19].
                The MDR method pools multilocus genotypes into a single dimension with two groups,
                classified as either high or low risk. The MDR software, described by Hahn et al. [20], will work with datasets that contain up to
                500 variables and can examine interactions among as many as 15 genetic and/or
                environmental factors. The MDR method was inspired by the combinatorial partitioning
                (CP) method of Nelson et al. [21]. Both
                methods apply data reduction techniques to address the problems associated with
                testing for interactions in high dimensional data with modest sample sizes. The two
                methods differ in the type of outcome variables addressed. The CP method applies
                when the outcome variable is continuous in nature while the MDR method applies when
                the outcome is categorical in nature (i.e. disease status).

Ritchie et al. [19] demonstrated that the MDR
                method was able to detect a high-order interaction in the absence of any
                statistically significant main effects in both simulated data and among four
                polymorphisms from three different estrogen-metabolism genes on the risk of sporadic
                breast cancer. Moore and Williams [1] describe
                an application of the MDR method for identifying gene-gene interactions in essential
                hypertension. Although the MDR method is equally applicable to detecting main
                effects as well as interactions, a major strength of the MDR method is its ability
                to detect significant interactions in the absence of main effects. Previous
                examinations in the PHS population had revealed that none of the polymorphisms of
                interest had significant main effects on the risk of MI [6,22,23]. This lack of main effects make this study
                an attractive candidate for applying the MDR method.

However, it is well known that models obtained using such data-driven methods are
                prone to increased type 1 errors [24]. Hence,
                proper validation of such models is crucial. One of the attractive features of the
                MDR software is that it provides a prediction error, an estimate of the internal
                validity of the model, as part of the default output. In this paper, we report our
                experience of having reported an interaction that was subsequently not confirmed in
                order to emphasize the importance of using validation measures, such as the
                prediction error, when building models using data driven approaches. We also
                investigate whether similar procedures can be used to derive internal prediction
                errors using conditional logistic regression models.

## Results

## Conditional logistic regression (CLR) approach

Using CLR with backwards selection to choose a final model, all terms related to 
                    t-PA dropped out of the model. In addition, there were no significant
                    differences between the DI and II genotypes
                    for ACE nor between the 4G4G and 4G5G genotypes
                    for PAI-1 on risk of MI. Hence the final model consisted of
                    four groups: the combinations of the ACE polymorphism
                    dichotomized into DD or not DD (DI 
                    or II) and the PAI-1 polymorphism dichotomized
                    into at least one 4G allele present or not (4G4G 
                    or 4G5G vs. 5G5G). Based on this final model,
                    there was a significant interaction between the ACE and 
                    PAI-1 polymorphisms (p = 0.02).

## Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) approach

We repeated the analysis using the MDR method with 10-fold cross validation [19,20
                    ,25]. The MDR analysis was conducted in
                    two ways: 1) using three separate genotypes for each polymorphism, and 2) using
                    the dichotomous groupings for the polymorphisms suggested by the literature
                    (recessive models for the ACE D and t-PA I alleles
                    and a dominant model for the PAI-1 4G allele).

Table 1 displays the minimum prediction
                    error and cross-validation consistency for the best 2-factor and 3-factor model
                    for each situation. The two-locus model including the ACE and 
                    PAI-1 polymorphisms, with the dichotomous groupings suggested by the
                    literature, simultaneously minimized prediction error and maximized the
                    cross-validation consistency. This model had a cross validation consistency of
                    100%, which was marginally significant with permutation testing (p = 0.09).

Figure 2 summarizes the two-locus genotype
                    combinations of ACE and PAI-1 associated with
                    high and low risk for MI. Note that the pattern of high-risk cells for the 
                    ACE polymorphism differs across the columns representing the 
                    PAI-1 polymorphism. Such differences are evidence of a gene-gene
                    interaction. When the dichotomy suggested by the MDR approach was input into a
                    logistic regression model, those participants classified as "high-risk" had a
                    significantly higher risk of MI compared to those classified as "low-risk" (OR =
                    1.44, 95% CI: 1.06–1.95).

## Comparing the results

Both approaches have substantially reduced the dimensionality of the data,
                    although the amount of dimensionality reduction differs slightly. The final
                    model chosen from the backwards CLR approach reduces the data to a set of four
                    groups while the MDR approach, by definition, reduces the data to two groups.
                    However, the conclusions obtained from the two methods were consistent with both
                    suggesting a possible interaction between the ACE I/D and PAI-1
                    4G/5G polymorphisms on the risk of MI. Table 2 shows the relationship between the ACE DD genotype
                    (versus not DD) and risk of MI, separately for the two PAI-1
                    groupings based on both analyses. In both analyses, among those with at least
                    one PAI-1 4G allele, individuals with the ACE DD genotype
                    had a significantly higher risk of MI as compared to those who carried the ACE
                    DI or II genotypes (CLR: OR = 1.50, 95% CI:
                    1.04–2.17; MDR: OR = 1.44, 95% CI: 1.06–1.95). In contrast,
                    among those with the PAI-1 5G5G genotype, individuals with the ACE
                    DD genotype had a significantly lower risk of MI compared to those who
                    carried the ACE DI or II genotypes only in the
                    MDR analysis (CLR: OR = 0.58, 95% CI: 0.29–1.17; OR = 0.69, 95% CI:
                    0.51–0.94). This is due to the fact that there is an inverse
                    relationship between the two odds ratios in the MDR analysis (0.69 = 1/1.44)
                    since we are simply reversing the combinations of the ACE polymorphism
                    defined as high and low risk for different combinations of the PAI-1 polymorphism
                    (see Figure 2).

For this example, both approaches would lead to the same model for the prediction
                    of future responses. In a similar data set, we would 'predict' a subject to be a
                    case if they have the combination of a) ACE DD and either PAI-1
                    4G4G or 4G5G or b) PAI-1 5G5G and
                    either ACE DI or II. Similarly, we would
                    'predict' someone in a similar data set to be a control if they have the
                    combination of a) ACE DD and PAI-1 5G5G or b)
                    either ACE DI or II and either PAI-1
                    4G4G or 4G5G. The discrepancy in the number of groups
                    becomes important if we wish to make statements about the excess risk associated
                    with each group. For example, is the amount of excess risk for having an MI the
                    same in the two "high-risk" groups or is the amount of excess risk higher in one
                    group than the other. One way to address this question would be to further
                    divide the high and low risk groups following an MDR analysis. Obviously, this
                    is an important area of future research.

As with all statistical analyses, replication and validity of findings is
                    necessary to separate true relationships from chance findings. One advantage of
                    the MDR method is that it provides the average prediction error, an internal
                    validation measure that protects against finding chance associations in the
                    sample. Although the original analysis suggested a marginally significant
                    interaction between the ACE and PAI-1 polymorphisms on the risk of MI, the
                    minimum prediction error of 46.2% is not significantly lower than the value of
                    50% that would be expected by chance (p = 0.15). This suggests that the model
                    may not be effective for classification of risk of MI. Concern regarding the
                    failure to obtain a satisfactory prediction error is only exacerbated by the
                    well-known problem of overestimation common to such data-driven analysis methods
                    [18,24
                    ].

We had not originally calculated an internal prediction error as part of our CLR
                    analysis. In fact, most standard statistical software packages do not provide
                    such internal validation measures by default with CLR approaches. This motivated
                    us to investigate whether and, if so, by what procedures, we could derive an
                    internal prediction error using CLR models. The SAS macro CVLR [Clinton T.
                    Moore, U.S. Geological Survey, Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, personal
                    correspondence] allows one to perform cross-validation with logistic regression
                    models. However, using the fact that the conditional likelihood for one-to-one
                    matched pairs is the same as the unconditional likelihood for a logistic
                    regression model where the response is always equal to one [26], the CVLR macro allows performing
                    cross-validation with conditional logistic regression models as well. To
                    parallel the internal validation of the MDR approach, ten-fold cross-validation
                    with the CVLR macro was used to determine the prediction error of the final CLR
                    model. The observed prediction error of 42% suggests a limited predictive
                    ability of this model, casting doubt on its clinical utility. This illustrates
                    that the additional effort required to obtain such prediction errors with CLR
                    models can suggest which seemingly significant interactions are not likely to
                    validate in subsequent samples.

## External validation sample

After this initial analysis, we were left with a significant gene-gene
                    interaction that did not appear to validate internally. An external validation
                    using an independent data set obtained from a study design as similar as
                    possible to the present study could help gain further insight as to whether or
                    not this significant interaction was scientifically important [27]. Due to the fact that monitoring for
                    cardiovascular events is ongoing in the PHS, after completion of the original
                    study an additional 141 cases, which were not included in the original sample
                    and had been genotyped for the ACE and PAI-1 polymorphisms, became available.
                    For each of these cases, a single control was selected at random from the
                    remaining study participants using the same matching criteria as in the original
                    study. This independent sample of 141 matched case-control pairs was appreciably
                    smaller than the sample in the original study. Hence, concerns regarding
                    adequate power were magnified in this validation sample and failure to validate
                    the significant finding in this sample does not preclude the presence of an
                    effect. Nevertheless, given the failure of the finding to internally validate,
                    computing the prediction error on the external sample may further suggest that
                    the initial significant finding does not validate, particularly since the
                    initial prediction error is typically underestimated.

One complicating factor was that genotyping methods had changed since completion
                    of the initial study. The initial study used assays for each individual
                    polymorphism, which have been described in detail elsewhere [6,22,23]. Multilocus genotyping assays were used
                    for the validation sample [28,29]. However, since the majority of the
                    participants in the initial study (95%) had been re-genotyped using the newer
                    methods, we were able to confirm that the rate of agreement between the two
                    methods was 97% and 93% for the ACE and PAI-1 polymorphisms,
                    respectively. Additionally, we obtained the same conclusions when we repeated
                    the original analysis replacing the original genotyping results with the results
                    using the newer method. Thus, we present results using the original genotyping
                    methods for the initial sample and the multilocus genotyping methods for the
                    validation sample.

Figure 3 summarizes the distribution of
                    cases and controls in the validation sample for the two-locus genotype
                    combinations of ACE and PAI-1. The shading in the figure corresponds to the
                    classification of that genotype combination in the original analysis (darker =
                    high-risk & lighter = low-risk). Each genotype combination contains a
                    nearly even split of cases and controls, with 48.9% of subjects in the
                    validation sample misclassified using the groupings from the original model.
                    This further suggests that the significant interaction observed in the initial
                    sample of 343 matched case-control pairs may not hold up under further scrutiny.

## Conclusions

For studies attempting to examine possible interactions among two or more genetic
                polymorphisms, traditional methods such as conditional logistic regression may
                either prove infeasible due to combinations of factors with no observations or have
                limited power to detect clinically relevant interactions due to a low number of
                events per parameter in the model. The MDR method was proposed as a possible
                solution in such settings. However, this example does not fully illustrate the
                potential of MDR since it is within the capabilities of standard CLR. In these
                instances, one would hope that the conclusions obtained from the MDR analysis are
                consistent with those obtained from the more traditional CLR analysis. In fact, we
                obtained a significant interaction between the ACE and 
                PAI-1 polymorphisms on risk of MI using both methods. The magnitude of the
                risk was substantial (1.5-fold increase in risk for those with the combined ACE
                DD genotype and at least one PAI-1 4G allele) and
                comparable to that of other risk factors for which interventions are undertaken. The
                fact that the MDR analysis led to the same conclusions as the more traditional CLR
                analysis in this example supports the fact that the MDR method is useful for
                analyzing data in situations where traditional methods cannot be applied. In many
                instances, researchers might attempt to publish such significant findings. However,
                the model validation procedures built into the MDR method suggest that, although the
                model was significant, there was poor internal validation. In addition, applying the
                MDR method to an independent validation sample drawn from the same study population
                suggested a lack of external validation as well. This negative result upon
                cross-validation is informative and serves as a stern warning that researchers
                should not publish significant results in genetic interaction studies without
                looking at model validation measures. We strongly feel that the lack of validation
                in this example arises due to the fact that the initial finding may be a type 1
                error. Had we published the initial significant findings without model validation,
                readers (and future researchers) may have been led to accept a result that, upon
                further review, may prove to be a type 1 error. This is a serious problem that
                explains why many published, significant findings are not replicated [30,31].

Although one cannot completely rule out the fact that the lack of validation may be
                due to an improper modeling method or poor data quality, we feel that this is highly
                unlikely in this situation. First, the PHS data set is known to be of high quality
                and has been one of the most widely published studies with regards to genetic
                determinants of disease. Furthermore, all analyses using PHS data must be verified
                by an independent statistical reviewer before the PHS team will release the data for
                publication. Second, although the MDR method is new, it can be shown that the
                classification method used by MDR once a combination of SNPs has been selected is no
                different than a Bayes classifier and is equivalent to the gold standard in data
                mining and machine learning. Finally, application of MDR to real data sets has
                revealed evidence of gene-gene interactions with statistically significant
                cross-validation prediction errors as low as 20% in data sets with smaller sample
                sizes than that analyzed in this study. Due to the reasons stated above, we feel
                that it is highly unlikely that the negative validation result is due to an improper
                modeling method or poor data quality.

In the original CLR analysis, we did not initially calculate an internal prediction
                error as this measure is not routinely reported nor is it included in the output of
                most standard logistic software packages. Using a special user-written macro to
                perform cross-validation, we have shown that an internal prediction error may be
                computed with CLR analyses. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that such internal
                prediction errors can provide the same information regarding the validity of the
                model as that obtained using the MDR approach. Although the construction of a
                prediction error from logistic regression using cross validation is not a novel
                result, we believe that this deserves wider attention. We recommend that, until
                prediction error capabilities are added to standard logistic regression software,
                users consider ways to compute these statistics to facilitate the standard reporting
                of internal prediction errors when examining genetic interactions in such models.

The primary conclusion of this study is that validation of genetic models using
                independent samples plays an important role in model-building using data-driven
                methods such as multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR). Although there is
                general agreement regarding the importance of model validation, this problem is too
                often ignored in published research. As Altman and Royston [18] state, "It is striking that the statistical problem of
                overoptimistic prediction is mentioned in very few prognostic studies...". They
                offer several reasons for this, including the fact that correction for
                overestimation often leads to less significant, and hence less impressive, results.
                The purpose of research is not to obtain 'significant p-values' (statistical
                significance), but to uncover relationships between variables and outcomes that can
                lead to improved treatments, therapies, or understanding of disease processes
                (scientific, public health, or clinical significance). As data-driven methods are
                developed to examine complex genetic interactions, it will become increasingly
                important to stress model validation in order to ensure that significant effects
                represent true relationships rather than chance findings.

## Methods

## PHS example

These data are from a nested case-control study involving participants from the
                    PHS, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of aspirin and beta
                    carotene in the prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer in a cohort of
                    predominantly white, male U.S. Physicians [32].
                    For the study described in this paper, 343 cases were identified who developed
                    an MI during follow-up and had been genotyped for the ACE, 
                    PAI-1, and t-PA polymorphisms. For each case, a single
                    control was selected at random from the subset of study participants who had
                    been genotyped for the three polymorphisms of interest and remained free of
                    cardiovascular disease during the follow-up period. Controls were matched to the
                    cases on age (+/- 1 yr), time since study initiation (+/- 6 months), and smoking
                    history (current, past, never).

## Conditional logistic regression approach

Our originally planned analysis utilized CLR models with backwards selection to
                    choose a final model. The 'full model' consisted of the 19 parameters described
                    above. With the exception that we did not allow the removal of main effects
                    terms for a polymorphism until all interaction terms involving that polymorphism
                    had been removed, at each step, the term with the highest p-value (provided it
                    was greater than 0.20) was removed from the model and the model was refit with
                    all remaining terms. This process was continued until no remaining terms could
                    be removed. Furthermore, because the existing literature suggests that any
                    possible effects may be due to the ACE DD genotype [11-13
                    ,15,16],
                    the presence of the PAI-1 4G allele [11-13], or the t-PA
                    II genotype [17], we allowed for
                    the collapse of appropriate genotypes if no significant difference was suggested
                    by the model (i.e. we considered a recessive model for the ACE D 
                    and t-PA I alleles and a dominant model for the PAI-1
                    4G allele). After obtaining the 'final model', the primary hypothesis
                    was to test whether the effects of the ACE I/D polymorphism on
                    the risk of MI depends on the presence of the PAI-1 4G/5G or t-PA
                    I/D polymorphisms.

We repeated the backwards selection process including such known MI risk factors
                    as hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, body mass index,
                    exercise, alcohol intake, angina, and randomized treatment assignment to aspirin
                    as factors. Controlling for these known risk factors made no material difference
                    in the odds ratios and corresponding confidence intervals related to the 
                    ACE and PAI-1 interaction. Furthermore, although the
                    MDR methods allow the inclusion of covariates, the use of these methods in the
                    presence of known covariates makes it much harder to disentangle the final
                    model. For these reasons, we present only the unadjusted analyses in this
                    manuscript.

## MDR approach

Figure 1 illustrates the general steps
                    involved in implementing the MDR method for matched case-control studies. First,
                    a set of genetic and/or discrete environmental factors of interest are
                    identified. Next, the MDR method is applied in the following stepwise manner: 1)
                    The matched pairs are randomly divided into 10 equal subsets. The data are then
                    divided into a training set (e.g. 9/10 of the matched pairs) and an independent
                    holdout set (e.g. 1/10 of the matched pairs) as part of cross-validation. The
                    MDR model is developed on the training sample. 2) Some set of n factors
                    are selected from the pool of all factors. 3) The n factors and
                    their multifactor cells are represented in n-dimensional space.
                    For example, for two polymorphisms with three genotypes each, there are nine
                    two-locus genotype combinations. 4) The ratio of cases to controls is computed
                    in each multifactor cell in n-dimensional space. Each
                    multifactor cell is labeled as "high-risk" if the number of cases exceeds the
                    number of controls. Otherwise, the multifactor cell is labeled as "low-risk".
                    This process reduces the n-dimensional multifactor classes into
                    a one-dimensional model with two multifactor classes: high-risk and low-risk. 5)
                    Steps 2–4 are repeated for all other n factor
                    combinations and the n factor model chosen which has the fewest
                    misclassified individuals in the training set as the 'best' n factor
                    model. 6) The classification from the 'best' n factor model is
                    used to predict disease status for the remaining 1/10 of the data (i.e. the
                    holdout set). By necessity, empty cells in either the training or holdout sample
                    are ignored since there is nothing to predict. The proportion of subjects is
                    computed in the holdout set for which an incorrect prediction was made. The
                    10-fold cross validation is repeated for each possible 9:1 split of the data.

To protect against chance divisions of the data, the 10-fold cross validation is
                    repeated ten times, i.e. the matched pairs are shuffled 10 times into 10 equal
                    subsets and the cross validation is applied to each possible 9:1 split for each
                    of the 10 shufflings. Finally, for the 'best' n factor model,
                    two statistics are reported: 1) The prediction error is the average of the 100
                    estimates of the proportion of subjects in the holdout set for which an
                    incorrect prediction is made. 2) The cross-validation consistency is the
                    percentage of times a particular set of n factors are
                    identified across the 100 cross-validation data sets.

The MDR approach first considers all two-factor combinations and chooses the
                    single "best" two-factor model with the lowest prediction error among all
                    two-factor combination models. This process is then repeated among all possible
                    higher order factor combinations, with a "best" model chosen at each step. From
                    the set of best models, we choose the model which minimizes the prediction error
                    and/or maximizes the cross-validation consistency. When several models achieve
                    the same prediction error and cross-validation consistency, the smaller model is
                    chosen for parsimony. For example, in the PHS data, the best two-factor model is
                    chosen from the 3 possible two-factor models (ACE &
                    PAI-1, ACE &t-PA, 
                    PAI-1 &t-PA) and compared to the three-factor
                    model containing all three polymorphisms. The model that minimizes the
                    prediction error is chosen as the final model. The significance of the final
                    model is determined using a permutation test. For each of 1000 permutations, the
                    matched pairs are permuted by flipping the case-control status within a pair
                    with a probability of 0.50, a new best model is selected, and the minimum
                    prediction error from the best model is tabulated. This provides an empirical
                    distribution of the average prediction error or cross-validation consistency
                    under the null hypothesis of no association. The p-value for the observed
                    prediction error or cross-validation consistency is computed by comparing its
                    value to this empirical distribution.

Although useful in a wide variety of situations, the MDR method is not without
                    its shortcomings. First, when MDR methods are used in the presence of main
                    effects or known important covariates, it becomes much harder to disentangle the
                    final model. For example, if an MDR analysis suggests that the optimal model
                    contains four factors, in many cases it is not readily clear whether this final
                    model represents a four-way interaction, two separate two-way interactions, two
                    main effects and a two-way interaction, etc. This is clearly an important area
                    of future research. Also, MDR assumes that there is no genetic (locus)
                    heterogeneity. For example, if half of the individuals were affected due to two
                    loci and the other half due to two other loci, there would be a decrease in MDR
                    power since the cross-validation consistency would be lower and the prediction
                    error higher for either pair of loci [25].
                    Genetic heterogeneity severely impacts power and future research is needed to
                    address this problem.

## Authors' contributions

CSC performed the conditional logistic regression analysis, participated in the
                design of the study, drafted the manuscript, and prepared the final version of the
                manuscript. PRH participated in the design and coordination of the study as well as
                the writing of the manuscript. MDR and JHM performed the MDR analysis and
                participated in the design of the study and writing of the manuscript. HMK provided
                input on earlier drafts of the manuscript. JMG and PMR provided the PHS data sets
                for this study. NJB and DEV conceived the original hypothesis for this study. All
                authors read and approved the final manuscript.

**Keywords:**
cross validation, epistasis, prediction error

## References

1. Moore JH, Williams SM. New Strategies For Identifying Gene-Gene Interactions in
                        Hypertension. *Ann Med*. 2002;34:88-95. DOI: 10.1080/07853890252953473. PMID: 12108579.
2. Moore JH. The Ubiquitous Nature of Epistasis in Determining Susceptibility
                        to Common Human Diseases. *Hum Hered*. 2003;56:73-82. DOI: 10.1159/000073735. PMID: 14614241.
3. Hirschhorn JN, Lohmueller K, Byrne E, Hirschhorn K. A Comprehensive Review of Genetic Association Studies. *Genet Med*. 2002;4:45-61. DOI: 10.1097/00125817-200203000-00002. PMID: 11882781.
4. Cambien F, Poirier O, Lecerf L, Evans A, Cambou JP, Arveiler D, Luc G, Bard JM, Bara L, Ricard S, Tiret L, Amouyel P, Alhenc-Gelas F, Soubrier F. Deletion Polymorphism in the Gene for Angiotensin-Converting
                        Enzyme is a Potent Risk Factor for Myocardial Infarction. *Nature*. 1992;359:641-644. DOI: 10.1038/359641a0. PMID: 1328889.
5. Ruiz J, Blanche H, Cohen N, Velho G, Camblen F, Cohen D, Passa P, Froguel P. Insertion/Deletion Polymorphism of the Angiotensin-Converting
                        Enzyme Gene is Strongly Associated with Coronary Heart Disease in
                        Non-Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 1994;91:3662-3665. PMID: 8170965.
6. Lindpaintner K, Pfeffer MA, Kreutz R, Stampfer MJ, Grodstein F, LaMotte F, Buring J, Hennekens CH. A Prospective Evaluation of an Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Gene
                        Polymorphism and the Risk of Ischemic Heart Disease. *N Engl J Med*. 1995;332:706-711. DOI: 10.1056/NEJM199503163321103. PMID: 7854377.
7. Ludwig E, Corneli PS, Anderson JL, Marshall HW, Lalouel JM, Ward RJ. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Gene Polymorphism is Associated
                        with Myocardial Infarction but not with Development of Coronary Stenosis. *Circulation*. 1995;91:2120-2124. PMID: 7697839.
8. Mattu RK, Needham EWA, Galton DJ, Frangos E, Clark AJL, Caulfield M. A DNA Variant at the Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Gene Locus
                        Associates with Coronary Artery Disease in the Caerphilly Heart Study. *Circulation*. 1995;91:270-274. PMID: 7805228.
9. Saksela O, Rifkin DB. Cell-Associated Plasminogen Activation: Regulation and
                        Physiologic Functions. *Annu Rev Cell Biol*. 1988;4:93-126. PMID: 3143380.
10. Vaughan DE. The Renin-Angiotensin System and Fibrinolysis. *Am J Cardiol*. 1997;79:12-16. DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9149(97)00124-0. PMID: 9127616.
11. Dawson S, Hamsten A, Wilman B, Henney A, Humphries S. Genetic Variation in the Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 Locus
                        is Associated with Altered Levels of Plasma Activator Inhibitor-1 Activity. *Arterioscler Thromb*. 1991;11:183-190. PMID: 1670989.
12. Dawson SJ, Wilman B, Hamsten A, Green F, Humphries S, Henney AM. The Two Allele Sequences of a Common Polymorphism in the Promoter
                        of the Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) Gene Respond Differently to
                        Interlukin-1 in HepG2 Cells. *J Biol Chem*. 1993;268:10739-10745. PMID: 8388372.
13. Kim DK, Kim JW, Kim S, Gwon HC, Ryu JC, Huh JE, Choo JA, Choi Y, Rhee CH, Lee WR. Polymorphism of Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Gene is Associated
                        with Circulating Levels of Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 1997;17:3742-3747.
14. Moore JH, Lamb JM, Brown NJ, Vaughan DE. A Comparison of Combinatorial Partitioning and Linear Regression
                        for the Detection of Epistatic Effects of the ACE I/D and PAI-1
                        4G/5G Polymorphisms on Plasma PAI-1 Levels. *Clin Genet*. 2002;62:74-79. DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2002.620110.x. PMID: 12123491.
15. Brown NJ, Gainer JV, Murphey LJ, Vaughan DE. Bradykinin Stimulates Tissue Plasminogen Activator Release From
                        Human Forearm Vasculature Through B2 Receptor-Dependent NO
                        Synthase-Independent, and Cyclooxygenase Pathway. *Circulation*. 2000;102:2190-2196. PMID: 11056091.
16. Murphey LJ, Gainer JV, Vaughan DE, Brown NJ. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Insertion/Deletion Polymorphism
                        Modulates the Human In Vivo Metabolism of Bradykinin. *Circulation*. 2000;102:829-832. PMID: 10952948.
17. Jern C, Ladenvall P, Wall U, Jern S. Gene Polymorphism of t-PA is Associated with Forearm Vascular
                        Release Rate of t-PA. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 1999;19:454-459. PMID: 9974431.
18. Altman DG, Royston P. What Do We Mean by Validating a Prognostic Model?. *Stat Med*. 2000;19:453-473. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(20000229)19:4<453::AID-SIM350>3.3.CO;2-X. PMID: 10694730.
19. Ritchie MD, Hahn LW, Roodi N, Bailey LR, Dupont WD, Fritz FP, Moore JH. Multifactor-Dimensionality Reduction Reveals High-Order
                        Interactions Among Estrogen-Metabolism Genes in Sporadic Breast Cancer. *Am J Hum Genet*. 2001;69:138-147. DOI: 10.1086/321276. PMID: 11404819.
20. Hahn LW, Ritchie MD, Moore JH. Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction for Detecting Gene-Gene
                        Interactions. *Bioinformatics*. 2002;19:376-382. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btf869.
21. Nelson MR, Kardia SLR, Ferrell RE, Sing CF. A Combinatorial Partitioning Method to Identify Genotypic
                        Partitions that Predict Quantitative Trait Variation. *Genome Res*. 2001;11:458-470. DOI: 10.1101/gr.172901. PMID: 11230170.
22. Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Lindpaintner K, Stampfer MJ, Miletich JP. Arterial and Venous Thrombosis is not Associated with the 4G/5G
                        Polymorphism in the Promoter of the Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor Gene in
                        a Large Cohort of Men. *Circulation*. 1997;95:59-62. PMID: 8994417.
23. Ridker PM, Baker MT, Hennekens CH, Stampfer MJ, Vaughan DE. Alu-repeat Polymorphism in the Gene Coding for Tissue-Type
                        Plasminogen Activator (t-PA) and Risk of Myocardial Infarction Among
                        Middle-Aged Men. *Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol*. 1997;17:1687-1690. PMID: 9327764.
24. Harrell FE. . *Regression Modeling Strategies with Applications to Linear Models,
                        Logistic Regression, and Survival Analysis*. 2001;Chapter 5:-.
25. Ritchie MD, Hahn LW, Moore JH. Power of Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction for Detecting
                        Gene-Gene Interactions in the Presence of Genotyping Error, Missing Data,
                        Phenocopy, and Genetic Heterogeneity. *Genet Epidemiol*. 2003;24:150-157. DOI: 10.1002/gepi.10218. PMID: 12548676.
26. Stokes ME, Davis CS, Koch GG. . *Categorical Data Analysis Using the SAS System*. 1995;Chapter 10:-.
27. Lalouel JM, Rohrwasser A. Power and Replication in Case-Control Studies. *Am J Hypertens*. 2002;15:201-205. DOI: 10.1016/S0895-7061(01)02285-3. PMID: 11863259.
28. Cheng S, Pallaud C, Grow MA, Scharf SJ, Erlich HA, Klitz W, Pullinger CR, Malloy MJ, Kane JP, Siest G, Visvikis S. A Multilocus Genotyping Assay for Cardiovascular Disease. *Clin Chem Lab Med*. 1998;36:561-566. PMID: 9806460.
29. Cheng S, Grow MA, Pallaud C, Klitz W, Erlich HA, Visvikis S, Chen JJ, Pullinger CR, Mallory MJ, Siest G, Kane JP. A Multilocus Genotyping Assay for Candidate Markers of
                        Cardiovascular Disease Risk. *Genome Res*. 1999;9:936-949. DOI: 10.1101/gr.9.10.936. PMID: 10523522.
30. Coffey CS, Hebert PR, Krumholz HM, Morgan TM, Williams SM, Moore JH. Reporting of Model Validation Procedures in Human Studies of
                        Genetic Interactions. *Nutrition*. 2004;20:69-73. DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2003.09.012. PMID: 14698017.
31. Redden DT, Allison DB. Non-Replication in Genetic Association Studies of Obesity and
                        Diabetes Research. *J Nutr*. 2003;133:3323-3326. PMID: 14608039.
32. Steering Committee of the Physicians' Health Study Research Group. Final Report on the aspirin component of the ongoing Physicians
                        Health Study. *N Engl J Med*. 1989;321:129-135. PMID: 2664509.
