# Patterns and dynamics of neutral lipid fatty acids in ants –
                    implications for ecological studies

**Authors:** Félix B. Rosumek, Adrian Brückner, Nico Blüthgen, Florian Menzel, Michael Heethoff

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 28717381
- Pmc: PMC5508481
- Publisher-id: 221
- Doi: 10.1186/s12983-017-0221-1

**Categories:**
- Research

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 13-7-2017
- Pmc-release: 13-7-2017
- Collection: 2017

## Abstract

### Background

Trophic interactions are a fundamental aspect of ecosystem
                        functioning, but often difficult to observe directly. Several indirect
                        techniques, such as fatty acid analysis, were developed to assess these
                        interactions. Fatty acid profiles may indicate dietary differences, while
                        individual fatty acids can be used as biomarkers. Ants are among the most
                        important terrestrial animal groups, but little is known about their lipid
                        metabolism, and no study so far used fatty acids to study their trophic
                        ecology. We set up a feeding experiment with high- and low-fat food to
                        elucidate patterns and dynamics of neutral lipid fatty acids (NLFAs)
                        assimilation in ants. We asked whether dietary fatty acids are assimilated
                        through direct trophic transfer, how diet influences NLFA total amounts and
                        patterns over time, and whether these assimilation processes are similar
                        across species and life stages.

### Results

Ants fed with high-fat food quickly accumulated specific dietary
                        fatty acids (C18:2n6, C18:3n3 and C18:3n6), compared to ants fed with
                        low-fat food. Dietary fat content did not affect total body fat of workers
                        or amounts of fatty acids extensively biosynthesized by animals (C16:0,
                        C18:0, C18:1n9). Larval development had a strong effect on the composition
                        and amounts of C16:0, C18:0 and C18:1n9. NLFA compositions reflected dietary
                        differences, which became more pronounced over time. Assimilation of
                        specific dietary NLFAs was similar regardless of species or life stage, but
                        these factors affected dynamics of other NLFAs, composition and total fat.

### Conclusions

We showed that ants accumulated certain dietary fatty acids via
                        direct trophic transfer. Fat content of the diet had no effect on lipids
                        stored by ants, which were able to synthesize high amounts of NLFAs from a
                        sugar-based diet. Nevertheless, dietary NLFAs had a strong effect on
                        metabolic dynamics and profiles. Fatty acids are a useful tool to study
                        trophic biology of ants, and could be applied in an ecological context,
                        although factors that affect NLFA patterns should be taken into account.
                        Further studies should address which NLFAs can be used as biomarkers in
                        natural ant communities, and how factors other than diet affect fatty acid
                        dynamics and composition of species with distinct life histories.

### Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12983-017-0221-1) contains
                        supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

## Background

Trophic interactions play a central role in ecosystem processes, shaping
                complex food webs with multiple paths and levels [1].
                The complexity of interactions within communities, however, makes it difficult to
                assess their nature and long-term outcome solely by field observations. Several
                complementary approaches were developed to address this issue, such as fatty acid
                analysis [2]. Fatty acids have been used to
                study trophic ecology of organisms in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems [3, 4].
                Variation in fatty acid profiles can answer basic questions about spatial and
                temporal variation in diets, as well as niche partitioning among species [3, 5, 6]. Also, fatty acids could be used as
                biomarkers, indicating qualitative and quantitative trophic relationships between
                organisms [7, 
                8]. Many recent studies using fatty acid analysis in terrestrial organisms
                focused on detritivores, such as Collembola and Nematoda [7, 9–14], which established the technique as a
                useful tool to analyze their feeding interactions in soil food webs [5, 15
                –17]. However, fatty acid patterns
                and dynamics depend on an organism’s physiology and composition of its
                natural diet, which are variable among taxonomic groups. Therefore, basic
                information on lipid metabolism is needed before the application of fatty acid
                analyses to study trophic relations of a given animal group.

Ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) are among the most abundant groups of
                invertebrates in terrestrial ecosystems, with a wide variety of feeding habits,
                nesting sites, and interactions with organisms from all trophic levels [18]. Many ant species have a cryptic behavior,
                which is difficult to study directly (e.g., living underground, inside the
                leaf-litter or in tree canopies). Moreover, in diverse ecosystems, dozens of species
                can coexist simultaneously in a given stratum [19].
                Thus, complementary techniques are needed to study their trophic ecology. Stable
                isotopes, for instance, have been extensively used to address many questions in ant
                ecology [20–22]. The application of DNA barcoding, another modern
                technique, is still incipient for ants [23
                –25]. Surprisingly, no study so far
                tested the applicability of fatty acids to understand trophic ecology of ants.

Ants in general are regarded as omnivorous, feeding on a combination of
                living prey, dead arthropods, seeds and plant exudates. Less common are specialized
                feeding habits such as fungus cultivation and predation exclusively upon certain
                arthropod groups, as well as use of unusual resources such as pollen, animal
                excrements or mushrooms [18, 26–29].
                Fatty acids from the diet could be incorporated without modification (i.e. through
                direct trophic transfer), or actively modified in response to environmental factors
                and physiological needs [4, 30, 31].
                Many ant species primarily feed on sugars usually obtained from floral and
                extra-floral nectar or honeydew [32]. Like
                all higher organisms, they can synthesize a set of fatty acids from carbohydrates
                via a decarboxylative Claisen condensation [33].
                Fatty acids are mainly stored as neutral lipid fatty acids (NLFAs), which mostly
                consist of triglycerides, the principal component of the insect fat body [30, 34].
                The biosynthesis of saturated palmitic (C16:0) and stearic acids (C18:0) and
                monounsaturated oleic acid (C18:1n9) seems to be widespread among insects, and
                correspondingly these fatty acids are the most abundant in their bodies [30]. On the other hand, the ability to
                synthesize polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic acid (C18:2n6), is highly
                variable among species [35, 36]. However, the details of these
                physiological processes in ants are poorly understood, and there are no studies
                specifically addressing dynamics of dietary fatty acids assimilation in this
                important insect group. Knowing which fatty acids can be unambiguously related to
                food sources, and how well the overall fat composition of ants reflects their diet
                after any metabolic modification, are crucial steps to apply fatty acid analysis in
                an ecological context.

Considering the potential use of fatty acids to understand trophic
                relations, and the lack of information about lipid metabolism in ants, we aim to
                elucidate patterns and dynamics of neutral lipid fatty acids in ants. We provided
                ants with high- and low-fat food in a no-choice feeding experiment, and compared the
                fatty acid profiles of ant workers and larvae over a period of 8 weeks. We
                specifically ask: (1) whether NLFA amounts and compositions are affected by a high-
                and a low-fat diet; (2) whether dietary fatty acids are accumulated in the
                ants’ body via direct trophic transfer; (3) how dietary fatty acids shape
                NLFA patterns over time; (4) whether these patterns and dynamics are the same in
                different species and life stages.

## Methods

## Studied species

The experiment was performed with colonies reared in the laboratory,
                    during November and December 2016. We chose two species, common and widespread
                    in the Northern hemisphere, which represent the largest Formicidae subfamilies: Formica
                    fusca Linnaeus 1758 (Formicinae) and Myrmica rubra
                    Linnaeus 1758 (Myrmicinae). Both have in nature a similar and generalized diet
                    of living and dead arthropods, nectar and honeydew [37, 38], and can
                    thus be reared in the laboratory with a single artificial diet. Six colonies of
                    each species were purchased from Antstore (Berlin, Germany) where ants were fed
                    on an unstandardized diet of honey and dead flies. All colonies had one queen
                    and between 9 and 12 (F. fusca) and 15–20 (M.
                    rubra) workers. Colonies of M. rubra were reproductive
                    during the whole experiment, with lower numbers of eggs and larvae towards the
                    end. For F. fusca, larvae were only observed in two colonies in
                    the last week of the experiment. Colonies were kept at a constant temperature of
                    25 °C and provided three times per week with water and food ad
                    libitum.

## Low- and high-fat treatments

Three colonies of each species received a low-fat treatment, whereas
                    the remaining three received a high-fat treatment. As low-fat food we used a
                    standardized recipe, suitable for breeding several ant species [39]. It contained 5 g agar,
                    1 g table salt (NaCl), 1 g vitamin-mineral mix powder
                    (Altapharma, Burgwedel, Germany), 62 ml honey and 1 chicken egg
                    homogenized in 500 ml hot water. The high-fat food followed the same
                    recipe, with addition of 60 ml linseed oil (organic quality, Alnatura,
                    Bickenbach, Germany). The mixture was stirred until it was cool and solid, to
                    avoid separation of the aqueous and fatty phases. Both food mixtures were stored
                    in a freezer at −20 °C until use, and food samples were
                    taken for chemical analysis.

## Experimental design

Before beginning the feeding experiment, we collected one worker per
                    colony for fatty acid analysis (= week 0). Workers were chosen randomly from
                    inside and outside the nest (a glass vial kept inside a plastic box). In
                    addition, one larva of M. rubra was collected per colony. After
                    starting to apply the treatments, we sampled one worker and one larva in the
                    same way, every week for 8 weeks. Larva sample sizes were smaller from week 5
                    onwards, because some colonies were not reproductive anymore. In the last week,
                    we also collected the queens for analysis (6 F. fusca
                    and 5 M. rubra, since one queen died at the beginning
                    of the experiment). All samples were immediately frozen at
                    −20 °C until extraction.

## Fatty acid analysis

Total lipids were extracted from the ants using 1 ml of a
                    chloroform:methanol mixture, 2:1 (v/v) over a period of
                    24 h [40, 41]. Ants were directly refrozen after extraction and
                    subsequently dried for 48 h at 50 °C and weighed with a
                    microbalance (Mettler Toledo, XS3DU, Columbus, USA). The extracts were purified
                    and separated according to the method described by Frostegård et al. [42]. SiOH-columns (Chromabond®)
                    were washed and conditioned with 6 ml hexane. Subsequently, samples were
                    applied on the column and elution of NLFAs (= mono-, di-, and triglycerides) was
                    accomplished with 4 ml chloroform.

The chloroform fractions were evaporated to dryness under gentle
                    nitrogen gas flow and residuals were redissolved in different concentrations of
                    dichloromethane:methanol 2:1 (v/v) to adjust the samples to
                    comparable concentration ranges: 1 ml for F. fusca
                    queens and food samples, 350 μl for workers of both species and M.
                    rubra queens, and 50 μl for larvae.
                    50 μl aliquots (10 μl for high-fat food) were
                    transferred to new glass vials with a conical inlet (150 μl) and
                    20 μl of internal standard (C19:0 in methanol; ρi = 220 ng/μl)
                    were added. Samples were evaporated to dryness again, and finally derivatized to
                    fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) with 20 μl TMSH
                    (trimethylsulfonium hydroxide; 0.25 M in MeOH from Fluka, Sigma-Aldrich,
                    St. Louis, USA).

FAME samples of NLFAs were analyzed with a QP2010 Ultra GC/MS
                    (Shimadzu, Duisburg, Germany). The gas chromatograph (GC) was equipped with a
                    ZB-5MS fused silica capillary column
                    (30 m × 0.25 mm ID,
                    df = 0.25 μm) from Phenomenex (Aschaffenburg,
                    Germany). Sample aliquots of 1 μl were injected by using an
                    AOC-20i autosampler-system from Shimadzu into a PTV-split/splitless-injector
                    (Optic 4, ATAS GL, Eindhoven, Netherlands), which operated in splitless-mode.
                    Injection-temperature was programmed from initial 70 °C up to
                    300 °C and then an isothermal hold for 59 min,
                    sampling-time was set to 3 min and hydrogen was used as carrier-gas with
                    a constant flow rate of 1.3 ml/min. The temperature of the GC oven was
                    raised from initial 60 °C for 1 min, to
                    150 °C with a heating-rate of 15 °C/min, to
                    260 °C with a heating-rate of 3 °C/min, to
                    320 °C with a heating-rate of 10 °C/min and then
                    an isothermal hold at 320 °C for 10 min. Electron
                    ionization mass spectra were recorded at 70 eV from m/z
                    40 to 650. The transfer line and ion source were kept at 250 °C.

Methyl esters of the NLFAs were identified by comparing gas
                    chromatographic retention times and m/z fragmentation patterns
                    with those of the Supelco® 37 Component FAME Mix standard and the
                    Bacterial Acid Methyl Ester (BAME) Mix standards as commercially available fatty
                    acids (all Sigma-Aldrich) and published literature data [31, 43, 44]. The identity of γ-linolenic
                    acid was additionally confirmed by an iodine catalyzed dimethyl disulfide
                    derivatization [45].

A technical problem during analysis resulted in the loss of a batch of
                    samples. Therefore, we have no data of week 3 for M. rubra
                    larvae, week 4 for M. rubra workers and week 5 for F.
                    fusca.

## Data analysis

In general we used two approaches to analyse our data: (1) linear
                    mixed-effect models (LMM) to assess the trophic transfer of certain fatty acids;
                    and (2) multivariate compositional data analysis to describe total NLFA
                    patterns. Only fatty acids with >1% composition were included in our
                    analyses. Queens were not statistically analyzed, since they were sampled just
                    at the end of the experiment.

We used the absolute amount of NLFAs [μg] standardized by dry
                    weight for ants or fresh weight for food [mg], thus reflecting the relative
                    amounts of NLFAs in comparison to non-lipid components [μg/mg]. We
                    additionally ran the analyses with absolute amounts and dry weight as a
                    cofactor, and results were identical for workers, but different for larvae, due
                    to their distinct dynamics (see S1 in Additional file 1, and results for larvae).

At first, we correlated the relative amounts of all NLFAs combined (=
                    total NLFAs) with dry weights of larvae and workers of both species using
                    Spearman’s rank correlation. For adults, body weight reflects size
                    polymorphism among workers. For larvae, body weight is a better indicator of
                    larval development than the week of sampling, because queens lay eggs
                    continuously during the reproductive time. Dry weights for workers did not
                    differ between treatments and over time, while larval dry weight increased over
                    time (see S2 in Additional file 1).
                    Since time and size were correlated for larvae (ρS
                     = 0.63, p < 0.001), we
                    ran separated LMMs for each factor, with dry weight normalized by square-root
                    transformation.

We statistically tested relative amounts of total NLFAs and of the
                    three most abundant fatty acids (C16:0, C18:0, C18:1n9). We also tested a
                    specific dietary NLFA (C18:2n6), which occurred in higher concentration in the
                    high-fat diet, and was not conspicuously synthesized by the ants. We did not
                    test the amounts of the other two specific dietary NLFAs (C18:3n3 and C18:3n6)
                    and show their results only in plots, because both were always zero in the
                    low-fat treatment and non-zero in the high-fat treatment. Remaining NLFAs that
                    occurred only in very small amounts in ants and food and were not tested either.

Effects on relative amounts were tested with linear mixed-effect
                    models (command lme) as implemented in the R package “nlme” [46] with feeding treatment and time as
                    fixed factors and colony ID as random factor for each species separately. We
                    checked for the normal distribution of the residuals and the homogeneity of
                    variance prior to the analyses and transformed the data if necessary (see S3 in
                    Additional file 1 for data
                    transformation). We further investigated the total NLFA amount in M.
                    rubra workers and larvae using a LMM with the same structure as before,
                    but including life stage as a further fixed factor. The difference between
                    workers and larvae was analyzed with a simultaneous test for general linear
                    hypothesis using Tukey pairwise contrasts (package “multcomp”; [47]) of the previous LMM.

We furthermore analyzed whether the overall NLFA composition (i.e.
                    percentages of all fatty acids) of F. fusca, M. rubra
                    workers and M. rubra larvae changed in the different treatments
                    over time. We tested Bray-Curtis similarities (BCS) based on compositional data
                    using permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA; [48]) for each species separately. Overall
                    10,000 permutations were performed with feeding treatment and time as fixed
                    factors and colony ID as random factor. We checked the multivariate homogeneity
                    of group dispersions before with a multivariate Levene’s test (PERMDISP;
                    all p values >0.1; [49]).
                    These analyses were performed with PRIMER 7.0.12 [50].

Finally, NLFA compositional data were ordinated using principal
                    component analyses (PCA) and according PCA biplots. We compared the differences
                    of the overall NLFA composition in F. fusca and M.
                    rubra who received the high-fat diet during the experimental time. We
                    used the centered log-ratio transformation after replacing zero values to deal
                    with the constant sum constraint of compositional data and make it suitable for
                    PCA (R packages “zCompositions” and
                    “compositions” [51, 52]). PCA biplots were constructed by
                    plotting factor loadings of compounds that significantly contributed (p < 0.01)
                    to the group separation onto the PCA scatter plots using the R package
                    “vegan” [53]. For a
                    detailed R script of this analysis, see [54].
                    LMMs and PCAs were performed with R version 3.3.1 [55].

## Results

## Fatty acid profiles of food and ants

The neutral lipid fatty acid (NLFA) profiles of ants and their food
                    are summarized in Table 1 (for full
                    dataset and value ranges, see Additional file 2). The high-fat food had about 40 times more total
                    concentration of NLFAs than the low-fat food. The main component of the high-fat
                    food was C18:3n3, but it also had notably higher amounts of C16:0, 18:0 and
                    C18:2n6. Besides, it contained C:18:3n6, which was entirely absent from the
                    low-fat food.

C16:0, C18:0 and C18:1n9 were the main fatty acids in ants (Table 1). C18:1n9 was the main component in all
                    experimental workers and queens. On the other hand, larvae had comparatively
                    high levels of C16:0 and C18:0. Ants from the high-fat treatment exhibited
                    higher amounts of C18:2n6, and were the only ones with detectable levels of
                    C18:3n3 and C18:3n6. Queens had less total NLFAs than workers. Samples were
                    variable, thus the profiles in Table 1
                    do not exactly reflect temporal and treatment differences (particularly for the
                    highly variable larvae); these effects are analyzed below.

## Dynamics of total and individual NLFA amounts

For F. fusca, there was no difference between
                    treatments in the total amount of NLFAs (Fig. 1a,
                    Table 2). C16:0, C18:0, C18:1n9 and
                    total NLFAs increased over time, but with no treatment effect (Fig. 1b-c, Table 2). On the other hand, we observed an increasingly
                    higher amount of C18:2n6 in the high-fat treatment, while it remained small in
                    the low-fat treatment (Fig. 1d, Table 2). Similarly, C18:3n3 and C18:3n6
                    increased remarkably in the high-fat treatment, but were never recorded in the
                    low-fat treatment (Figs. 1e-f). Formica
                    fusca presented considerable polymorphism (coefficient of variation [=
                    CV] of dry weights = 41%), but there was no correlation between
                    body size and total NLFA amount (ρS
                     = −0.06, p = 0.66).

For M. rubra, the amounts of C18:2n6, C18:3n3 and
                    C18:3n6 also increased in the high-fat treatment, and the last two NLFAs were
                    completely absent in the low-fat treatment (Fig. 
                    2d-f, Table 2). No time effect
                    was observed for C18:2n6 in this species. There was no treatment effect in
                    C16:0, C18:0, C18:1n9 and total NLFAs, but, opposite to F. fusca,
                    we observed an overall decrease over time (Figs. 
                    2a-b, Table 2). Myrmica
                    rubra workers varied less in size (CV of dry
                    weights = 17%) and, again, no correlation was found between body
                    size and total NLFA amount (ρS = 0.19, 
                    p = 0.19).

Myrmica rubra larvae presented more complex dynamics, because
                    they were influenced both by experimental time effect and their developmental
                    stage. Nevertheless, since these variables were correlated, LMM results were
                    similar, except for C18:1n9 (Table 2).
                    The increasing trends for C18:2n6, C18:3n3 and C18:3n6 were the same as in
                    workers (Fig. 3d-f, Table 2). Total NLFAs also decreased with time
                    (Fig. 3b, Table 2), but in a higher rate than in workers (Tukey
                    pairwise contrasts, z = 4.70, p < 0.001,
                    for full model see S4 in Additional file 1).
                    Larvae from the high-fat treatment had more total NLFAs and C18:1n9 overall
                    during the experiment (Figs. 3a-c, Table 2 [A]). However, as larvae increased in
                    dry weight, C18:1n9 actually was higher in the low-fat treatment compared to the
                    high-fat treatment (Table 2 [B]). There
                    was a strong negative correlation between larval dry weight and relative NLFA
                    amount (Fig. 4; Table 2 [B], ρS
                     = −0.72, p < 0.001).
                    The absolute amount of fat slightly increased with body size, but did not follow
                    the growth in other body components, which resulted in lower concentration of
                    NLFAs in larger and older larvae (Fig. 4).
                    This decrease was mostly due to a decline on saturated fatty acids (C16:0 and
                    C18:0, Table 2, see S5 in Additional
                    file 1). Therefore, young larvae had
                    relatively large fat storages and high ratios of saturated:unsaturated fatty
                    acids, which both decreased during development.

## Dynamics of overall fatty acid composition

The overall NLFA composition of the ants changed over time (Table 3). Treatment and time affected the
                    composition of F. fusca and M. rubra larvae.
                    For M. rubra workers, no effect was found. However, this could
                    be understood when the profile change of the high-fat colonies was analyzed with
                    PCA (Fig. 5). For both species, we
                    noticed a shift in composition over time, mainly driven by the dietary fatty
                    acids. For F. fusca, C18:2n6, C18:3n3 and C18:3n6 altogether
                    had a statistically significant effect on this shift. For M. rubra,
                    only C18:3n3 (the main dietary fatty acid) had a significant effect. The samples
                    from week 8 were particularly odd, showing small proportions of C18:3n3 and
                    C18:1n9 and relatively high proportions of C16:0 and C18:0. One individual from
                    each treatment had unusually low amounts of total fat and oleic acid (below
                    20 μg/mg and 10% of composition, respectively; see Additional
                    file 2), which added significant
                    variation to the results. When week 8 was removed from the PERMANOVA, the
                    treatment effect was noticeable (Table 3
                    ).

## Discussion

## Fatty acid profiles of ants

Several factors influence the fatty acid composition of insects, such
                    as flying activity, life stage, growth, reproductive status, environmental
                    temperature, and diet [4, 30, 56].
                    Due to this complexity, Stanley-Samuelson et al. [30] argued against a “typical” insect
                    profile, and indeed a high variation is found among orders, families, and
                    species [56, 57]. Just a few ant profiles are available in literature: Myrmica
                    incompleta Provancher, 1881 (worker and pupae; [58]), Lasius claviger (Roger, 1862) (only
                    pupae; [59]), Myrmica rubra
                    (only the free fatty acid fraction from head extracts; [60, 61]) and Polyrhachis
                    dives Smith, 1857 (sun-dried workers cultivated as food; [62]). These fatty acid profiles are not
                    entirely comparable due to the multitude of goals and methods, but, together
                    with our results, they indicate C18:1n9 as the predominant NLFA in ant bodies,
                    followed by C16:0 and C18:0. High levels of C18:1n9 are standard for
                    Hymenoptera, but the abundance of other fatty acids varies within the order [56].

## Dynamics of individual NLFAs and overall composition

Some fatty acids are extensively synthesized de novo by animals, while
                    others are produced in small amounts, or only by certain taxa [30, 36].
                    In our experiment, the food enrichment with linseed oil allowed us to observe
                    the influence of diet on NLFAs found a priori in high, low and null amounts in
                    ants’ bodies. C18:3n3 and C18:3n6 were absent in week 0, and solely
                    recorded in the high-fat treatment during the experiment. This suggests that
                    ants are not able to synthesize them, or only in small doses which are directly
                    incorporated in the polar lipid fractions (i.e. phospholipids, glycolipids, free
                    fatty acids). The amounts of C18:3n3 and C18:3n6 increased with the time ants
                    fed on the diet, thus their concentration reflects how much/how often the ants
                    consumed a resource. If these NLFAs are neither highly mobilized nor modified,
                    they should mainly be stored in the fat body when acquired in considerable
                    amounts from the diet, and thus detectable with neutral lipid fatty acid
                    analysis.

C18:2n6 was found in smaller amounts in all samples of the low-fat
                    treatment, but it is not clear whether this fatty acid was synthesized by ants
                    de novo, was obtained from the small amounts in the food, or from the
                    pre-experimental diet. About one third of reported insect species, from five
                    different orders, are able to synthesis C18:2n6, but high interspecific
                    variation was observed within orders [35
                    , 36]. Regarding the Hymenoptera,
                    C18:2n6 biosynthesis was not observed in the mason bee Osmia lignaria
                    Say, 1837 (Megachilidae) [35], but it is
                    known from the parasitoid Nasonia vitripennis (Walker, 1836)
                    (Pteromalidae) [63]. Regardless of the
                    actual ability of ants to synthesize C18:2n6, its amounts also increased with
                    the diet and, in F. fusca, over time as well. In M.
                    rubra and its larvae the time effect was not clear.

On the other hand, C16:0, C18:0 and C18:1n9 behaved similarly in both
                    treatments. No treatment effect in C16:0 and C18:0 was noticed, even if they
                    occurred in the high-fat food in levels higher than C18:3n6 and C18:2n6,
                    respectively. Hence, it seems most likely that C16:0, C18:0 and C18:1n9 are
                    synthesized de novo in large amounts from carbohydrates and constantly modified
                    depending on physiological requirements. For example, the physiologically ideal
                    fluidity of the fat body, which changes accordingly with environmental
                    temperature, is achieved through a balanced ratio between saturated and
                    unsaturated fatty acids [4]. Hence, the
                    interplay between β-oxidation and Claisen condensation of these abundant
                    NLFAs should be essential for this mechanism. The lack of a treatment effect on
                    total NLFAs also suggests that, at least under ad libitum
                    feeding conditions, ants have no significant energetic loss due to de novo fatty
                    acid biosynthesis. Thus, ants with a sugar-based diet should not have a
                    disadvantage compared to species that acquire most lipids from the diet.
                    However, this may not be true under conditions with limited resources, and
                    detectable differences in ratios could occur between ants that feed directly on
                    lipids and ants that only synthesize them.

Our multivariate analyses showed that a shift in diet results in an
                    equivalent shift in profile, and this difference was more pronounced when the
                    ants fed longer on that resource (Table 3,
                    Fig. 5). The main drivers of this
                    compositional change were specific dietary NLFAs. Therefore, these profiles
                    represent another way to assess dynamics of resource use or detect differences
                    among species [3, 5, 6]. They could be
                    particularly useful when the exact lipid composition of the food is not known,
                    such as in samples collected from the field.

## Factors affecting NLFA dynamics

Our results point out to several factors that affect lipid metabolism
                    in ants, and could be important from biological and methodological points of
                    view. First of all, one possible caveat of analytical methods that use
                    ants’ full body is that the undigested food stored in their crops could
                    bias the results [20]. If this were the
                    case in our experiment, we would expect higher total amount of lipids in ants of
                    the high-fat treatment, and a conspicuous increase during the first week. Also,
                    higher variance should occur in the high-fat treatment, due to the collection of
                    workers with variable crop filling. However, (1) the amount of NLFAs did not
                    differ between treatments, with the exception of larvae (which do not possess a
                    crop; [64]); (2) we observed linear
                    patterns for total fat and several NLFAs, consistent with lipid storage in the
                    fat body; and (3) variances did not differ between treatments, in all cases (F
                    test; F. fusca – F = 1.01, p
                     = 0.97, M. rubra –
                    F = 1.58, p = 0.28, larvae
                    – F = 1.67, p = 0.28).
                    Even if ants had undigested food in their crops, its contribution would have
                    been relatively small. Thus, as far as the dietary component of interest does
                    not occur in very high amounts in the food (e.g. ca. 10% NLFAs in our high-fat
                    diet), full body extraction can be used to investigate the effect of diet in
                    ants. In certain research contexts, however, it might be important to fully
                    eliminate this factor, using a methodological alternative such as dissection of
                    the fat body.

The reproductive status of the colonies influenced fatty acid
                    dynamics. Feeding the brood can negatively affect the amount of fat stored by
                    the workers, as observed in Camponotus festinatus (Buckley,
                    1866) [65], potentially explaining the
                    decrease of NLFAs in M. rubra. On the contrary, F.
                    fusca colonies were getting closer to reproduction mode during the
                    experiment, and effectively we observed larvae in two colonies at the last week
                    (this reproductive timing was also observed in non-experimental colonies kept in
                    the same conditions). These colonies needed to accumulate reserves to fuel
                    upcoming larval feeding and egg laying. Considering this, it is intriguing that
                    queens of both species displayed a very low amount of fat at the end of the
                    experiment.

We also observed an effect of development in compositions and dynamics
                    of M. rubra larvae. The young larvae had large fat storages and
                    amounts of saturated fatty acids. Earlier in their growth process, they quickly
                    develop other tissues to build more complex organs [66], resulting in a proportionally smaller amount of
                    NLFAs. The increase in C18:1n9 in the low-fat treatment with development may
                    appear counterintuitive, but this was the only unsaturated NLFA ants were able
                    to synthesize in large amounts. In turn, larvae from the high-fat treatment
                    already received several polyunsaturated NLFAs from the diet. The shift to a
                    more balanced composition between saturated and unsaturated NLFAs might enhance
                    metabolic processes in a more complex body. In contrat to workers, larvae seem
                    to benefit from a high-fat diet from which they accumulate slightly more NLFAs.
                    For Solenopsis invicta Buren, 1972 it has been demonstrated
                    that sugars, lipids and proteins are differently allocated among worker
                    subcastes, larvae and queens [67].

The distinct distribution of nutrients among individuals of a colony
                    is not restricted to different life stages, but also among worker subcastes.
                    Several studies observed higher fat storage in workers that stay inside the nest
                    and take care of the brood (= nurses), and less in workers that spend more time
                    in activities outside the nest (= foragers) [67
                    , 68]. However, this pattern may not
                    occur in a few species, and no difference was previously found in field samples
                    of F. fusca [69]. In M.
                    rubra, nurse and forager subcastes were identified in laboratory
                    colonies smaller than ours, and their role was related to individual age and
                    size [70]. Differences in worker size
                    were unrelated to total amount of fat for both species in our data. Individual
                    variation in fat storages could indicate behavioral subcastes, but it was the
                    same in the reproductive M. rubra and the non-reproductive F.
                    fusca (CV of NLFA total amounts for all samples = 72%
                    in both species). Thus, we found no evidence for considerable differences in
                    lipid storage across behavioral or morphological subcastes within these species,
                    under our experimental conditions, although these effects may be minute in small
                    colonies and need a specific setup to be detected.

Regardless of the variation across species and life stages in profiles
                    and dynamics, the assimilation of specific dietary NLFAs (C18:2n6, C18:3n3 and
                    C18:3n6) followed the same pattern. Thus, the physiological processes involved
                    in NLFA metabolism should be conserved at least between the subfamilies
                    Formicinae and Myrmicinae, which comprise about three quarters of all valid ant
                    species [71]. It is likely that all ants
                    behave similarly, but this needs to be tested with experiments using species
                    with more diversified feeding behaviors and from more distant branches of the
                    ant tree of life, such as the Ponerinae or Dorylinae [72].

## Implications to the study of ant trophic ecology

In trophic ecology, fatty acids can basically be used in two ways: as
                    overall profiles, whose variation indicates differences in diet; and as
                    biomarkers, which indicate specific interactions between organisms [3, 4].
                    Our results suggest that both applications are suitable for ants. Profiles and
                    individual NLFAs observed in ants changed in response to diet, and these shifts
                    became more pronounced over time. Fatty acid analysis can provide a better
                    resource resolution than stable isotopes, in a more quantitative way and
                    representative timeframe than barcoding of gut DNA [2]. However, these methods are complementary, rather than
                    opposing, and could be coupled with field observations to provide a
                    comprehensive perspective on ant trophic ecology.

The factors affecting NLFA amounts and composition that we observed
                    should also be considered in an ecological context. A representative sample of
                    castes and life stages is recommended if one is interested in detailed trophic
                    ecology of a particular species. For a study at community level, profiles of
                    forager workers sampled at a similar time may be enough to provide comparative
                    information on resource partitioning, although distinct reproduction times could
                    influence amounts and compositions.

In this study, we did not aim to survey prospective biomarkers for
                    natural resources used by ants. However, the three specific dietary NLFAs
                    (C18:2n6, C18:3n3 and C18:3n6) presented chemical properties of suitable
                    biomarkers, as they were not produced by ants (or only in small amounts) and
                    assimilated through direct trophic transfer, with little or no metabolic
                    modification [4]. They can be found in
                    natural diets of ants, such as in elaiosomes, seeds and other insects, in
                    variable patterns that may allow detection of specific interactions [56, 73
                    , 74]. Thus, they are good candidates
                    for trophic markers. Since their assimilation was not affected by species
                    identity, reproductive status or life stage, the biomarker approach seems to be
                    quite promising for ants. Naturally, the actual relevance of these NLFAs would
                    depend on context and occurrence within a community. On the other hand, since
                    C16:0, C18:0 and C18:1n9 are synthesized from carbohydrates in large amounts,
                    and highly modified to attend physiological needs, it would be difficult to
                    relate their amounts to a particular resource or feeding behavior. Further
                    research can provide more fatty acids useful as biomarkers, related to other
                    resources used by ants, which would likely be distinct from the ones suggested
                    for other groups (e.g. C18:1n9 as an indicator of herbivory in Collembola [5]).

## Conclusions

We showed that ants accumulated fatty acids from their diet via direct
                trophic transfer, and that both, individual NLFAs and overall profiles reflect their
                diets. The fat content of the diet had no effect in lipids stored by ants, which
                shows that they are able to synthesize large amounts of NLFAs from sugars. Other
                factors such as reproductive status and life stage also affected total amounts and
                profiles of NLFAs. Specific dietary fatty acids were assimilated independent of
                species or life stage. Fatty acid analysis is a suitable technique to study feeding
                behavior of ants, and can become a valuable tool to study ant trophic ecology in the
                field. To this end, central points to be addressed by future research are which
                biomarkers are most informative of ant diets in natural communities, and how factors
                other than diet affect fatty acid dynamics and composition of ant species with
                distinct life histories.

## Additional files

Additional file 1:
                            
                                Supplementary information. (PDF 511 kb)
                            
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            Additional file 2:
                            
                                Full dataset. (XLSX 42 kb)

**Keywords:**
Direct trophic transfer, Lipid metabolism, Dietary routing, Fatty acid biosynthesis, Trophic enrichment, Trophic ecology, Trophic markers, Formicidae, Formica fusca, Myrmica rubra

**Funding Sources:**
- Institution: Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e
                                Tecnológico
  - Institution ID: http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100003593
- Institution: Studienstiftung des Deutschen Volkes
  - Institution ID: http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100004350
- Institution: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
  - Institution ID: http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001659
  - Award ID: HE4593/5-1
  - Principal Investigator: Michael Heethoff

## References

1. Polis GA, Strong DR. Food web complexity and community dynamics. *Am Nat*. 1996;147:813-846. DOI: 10.1086/285880.
2. Birkhofer K, Bylund H, Dalin P, Ferlian O, Gagic V, Hambäck PA. Methods to identify the prey of invertebrate predators in
                        terrestrial field studies. *Ecol Evol*. 2017;7:1942-1953. DOI: 10.1002/ece3.2791. PMID: 28331601.
3. Budge SM, Iverson SJ, Koopman HN. Studying trophic ecology in marine ecosystems using fatty acids:
                        a primer on analysis and interpretation. *Mar Mammal Sci*. 2006;22:759-801. DOI: 10.1111/j.1748-7692.2006.00079.x.
4. Ruess L, Chamberlain PM. The fat that matters: soil food web analysis using fatty acids
                        and their carbon stable isotope signature. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2010;42:1898-1910. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2010.07.020.
5. Ruess L, Schütz K, Haubert D, Häggblom MM, Kandeler E, Scheu S. Application of lipid analysis to understand trophic interactions
                        in soil. *Ecology*. 2005;86:2075-2082. DOI: 10.1890/04-1399.
6. Ferlian O, Scheu S, Pollierer MM. Trophic interactions in centipedes (Chilopoda, Myriapoda) as
                        indicated by fatty acid patterns: variations with life stage, forest age and
                        season. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2012;52:33-42. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2012.04.018.
7. Chamberlain PM, Bull ID, Black HIJ, Ineson P, Evershed RP. Collembolan trophic preferences determined using fatty acid
                        distributions and compound-specific stable carbon isotope values. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2006;38:1275-1281. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2005.09.022.
8. Pollierer MM, Scheu S, Haubert D. Taking it to the next level: Trophic transfer of marker fatty
                        acids from basal resource to predators. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2010;42:919-925. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2010.02.008.
9. Ruess L, Häggblom MM, Garcia Zapata EJ, Dighton J. Fatty acids of fungi and nematodes – possible biomarkers
                        in the soil food chain?. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2002;34:745-756. DOI: 10.1016/S0038-0717(01)00231-0.
10. Chamberlain PM, Bull ID, Black HIJ, Ineson P, Evershed RP. Fatty acid composition and change in Collembola fed differing
                        diets: identification of trophic biomarkers. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2005;37:1608-1624. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2005.01.022.
11. Haubert D, Häggblom MM, Scheu S, Ruess L. Effects of fungal food quality and starvation on the fatty acid
                        composition of Protaphorura fimata (Collembola). *Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol*. 2004;138:41-52. DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpc.2004.02.009. PMID: 15142535.
12. Haubert D, Langel R, Scheu S, Ruess L. Effects of food quality, starvation and life stage on stable
                        isotope fractionation in Collembola. *Pedobiologia*. 2005;49:229-237. DOI: 10.1016/j.pedobi.2004.11.001.
13. Haubert D, Häggblom MM, Scheu S, Ruess L. Effects of temperature and life stage on the fatty acid
                        composition of Collembola. *Eur J Soil Biol*. 2008;44:213-219. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejsobi.2007.09.003.
14. Haubert D, Pollierer MM, Scheu S. Fatty acid patterns as biomarker for trophic interactions:
                        changes after dietary switch and starvation. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2011;43:490-494. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2010.10.008.
15. Ruess L, Schütz K, Migge-Kleian S, Häggblom MM, Kandeler E, Scheu S. Lipid composition of Collembola and their food resources in
                        deciduous forest stands – implications for feeding strategies. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2007;39:1990-2000. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2007.03.002.
16. Haubert D, Birkhofer K, Fließbach A, Gehre M, Scheu S, Ruess L. Trophic structure and major trophic links in conventional versus
                        organic farming systems as indicated by carbon stable isotope ratios of
                        fatty acids. *Oikos*. 2009;118:1579-1589. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0706.2009.17587.x.
17. Ngosong C, Raupp J, Scheu S, Ruess L. Low importance for a fungal based food web in arable soils under
                        mineral and organic fertilization indicated by Collembola grazers. *Soil Biol Biochem*. 2009;41:2308-2317. DOI: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2009.08.015.
18. Kaspari M. A primer on ant ecology. In: Ants: standard methods for measuring and monitoring biodiversity. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press; 2000.
19. Agosti D, Majer J, Alonso L, Schultz T. Sampling ground-dwelling ants: case studies from the worlds’
                        rain forests. Perth: Curtin University of Technology; 2000.
20. Blüthgen N, Gebauer G, Fiedler K. Disentangling a rainforest food web using stable isotopes:
                        dietary diversity in a species-rich ant community. *Oecologia*. 2003;137:426-435. DOI: 10.1007/s00442-003-1347-8. PMID: 12898386.
21. Davidson DW, Cook SC, Snelling RR, Chua TH. Explaining the abundance of ants in lowland tropical rainforest
                        canopies. *Science*. 2003;300:969-972. DOI: 10.1126/science.1082074. PMID: 12738862.
22. 
23. Fournier V, Hagler J, Daane K, de León J, Groves R. Identifying the predator complex of Homalodisca
                        vitripennis (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae): a comparative study of the
                        efficacy of an ELISA and PCR gut content assay. *Oecologia*. 2008;157:629-640. DOI: 10.1007/s00442-008-1095-x. PMID: 18618149.
24. Muilenburg VL, Goggin FL, Hebert SL, Jia L, Stephen FM. Ant predation on red oak borer confirmed by field observation and
                        molecular gut-content analysis. *Agric For Entomol*. 2008;10:205-213. DOI: 10.1111/j.1461-9563.2008.00371.x.
25. Penn HJ, Chapman EG, Harwood JD. Overcoming PCR inhibition during DNA-based gut content analysis
                        of ants. *Environ Entomol*. 2016;45:1255-1261. DOI: 10.1093/ee/nvw090. PMID: 27452765.
26. Blüthgen N, Feldhaar H. Food and shelter: how resources influence ant ecology. In: Ant Ecolgy. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2010.
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. Stanley-Samuelson DW, Jurenka RA, Cripps C, Blomquist GJ, de Renobales M. Fatty acids in insects: composition, metabolism, and biological
                        significance. *Arch Insect Biochem Physiol*. 1988;9:1-33. DOI: 10.1002/arch.940090102.
31. 
32. Davidson DW, Cook SC, Snelling RR. Liquid-feeding performances of ants (Formicidae): ecological and
                        evolutionary implications. *Oecologia*. 2004;139:255-266. DOI: 10.1007/s00442-004-1508-4. PMID: 15034777.
33. Heath RJ, Rock CO. The Claisen condensation in biology. *Nat Prod Rep*. 2002;19:581-596. DOI: 10.1039/b110221b. PMID: 12430724.
34. Fast PG. Insect lipids: a review. *Mem Entomol Soc Can*. 1964;37:1-50.
35. Cripps C, Blomquist GJ, de Renobales M. De novo biosynthesis of linoleic acid in insects. *Biochim Biophys Acta BBA-Lipids Lipid Metab*. 1986;876:572-580. DOI: 10.1016/0005-2760(86)90046-9.
36. Renobales M, Cripps C, Stanley-Samuelson DW, Jurenka RA, Blomquist GJ. Biosynthesis of linoleic acid in insects. *Trends Biochem Sci*. 1987;12:364-366. DOI: 10.1016/0968-0004(87)90167-8.
37. 
38. Seifert B. Die Ameisen Mittel- und Nordeuropas. Lutra: Tauer; 2007.
39. Bhatkar A, Whitcomb WH. Artificial diet for rearing various species of ants. *Fla Entomol*. 1970;53:229-232. DOI: 10.2307/3493193.
40. Folch J, Lees M, Stanley GHS. A simple method for the isolation and purification of total
                        lipides from animal tissues. *J Biol Chem*. 1957;226:497-509. PMID: 13428781.
41. Gómez-Brandón M, Lores M, Domínguez J. A new combination of extraction and derivatization methods that
                        reduces the complexity and preparation time in determining phospholipid
                        fatty acids in solid environmental samples. *Bioresour Technol*. 2010;101:1348-1354. DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2009.09.047. PMID: 19800785.
42. Frostegård Å, Tunlid A, Bååth E. Microbial biomass measured as total lipid phosphate in soils of
                        different organic content. *J Microbiol Methods*. 1991;14:151-163. DOI: 10.1016/0167-7012(91)90018-L.
43. Zelles L. Fatty acid patterns of phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides in
                        the characterisation of microbial communities in soil: a review. *Biol Fertil Soils*. 1999;29:111-129. DOI: 10.1007/s003740050533.
44. http://webbook.nist.gov. 
45. 
46. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=nlme. 
47. Hothorn T, Bretz F, Westfall P. Simultaneous inference in general parametric models. *Biom J*. 2008;50:346-363. DOI: 10.1002/bimj.200810425. PMID: 18481363.
48. Anderson MJ. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of variance. *Austral Ecol*. 2001;26:32-46.
49. Anderson MJ. Distance-based tests for homogeneity of multivariate dispersions. *Biometrics*. 2006;62:245-253. DOI: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2005.00440.x. PMID: 16542252.
50. Clarke KR, Gorley RN. PRIMER v7: User Manual/Tutorial. Plymouth: PRIMER-E; 2015.
51. Palarea-Albaladejo J, Martín-Fernández JA. zCompositions — R package for multivariate imputation of
                        left-censored data under a compositional approach. *Chemom Intell Lab Syst*. 2015;143:85-96. DOI: 10.1016/j.chemolab.2015.02.019.
52. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=compositions. 
53. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan. 
54. Brückner A, Heethoff M. A chemo-ecologists’ practical guide to compositional data
                        analysis. *Chemoecology*. 2017;27:33-46. DOI: 10.1007/s00049-016-0227-8.
55. https://www.R-project.org. 
56. Thompson SN. A review and comparative characterization of the fatty acid
                        compositions of seven insect orders. *Comp Biochem Physiol Part B Comp Biochem*. 1973;45:467-482. DOI: 10.1016/0305-0491(73)90078-3.
57. Hanson BJ, Cummins KW, Cargill AS, Lowry RR. Lipid content, fatty acid composition, and the effect of diet on
                        fats of aquatic insects. *Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part B Comp. Biochem*. 1985;80:257-276. DOI: 10.1016/0305-0491(85)90206-8.
58. 
59. Barlow JS. Fatty acids in some insect and spider fats. *Can J Biochem*. 1964;42:1365-1374. DOI: 10.1139/o64-148. PMID: 14240722.
60. Brian MV, Blum MS. The influence of Myrmica queen head extracts on
                        larval growth. *J Insect Physiol*. 1969;15:2213-2223. DOI: 10.1016/0022-1910(69)90238-8.
61. Brian MV. Caste control through worker attack in the ant Myrmica. *Insect Soc*. 1973;20:87-102. DOI: 10.1007/BF02223340.
62. Bhulaidok S, Sihamala O, Shen L, Li D. Nutritional and fatty acid profiles of sun-dried edible black
                        ants (Polyrhachis vicina Roger). *Maejo Int J Sci Technol*. 2010;4:101-112.
63. Blaul B, Steinbauer R, Merkl P, Merkl R, Tschochner H, Ruther J. Oleic acid is a precursor of linoleic acid and the male sex
                        pheromone in Nasonia vitripennis. *Insect Biochem Mol Biol*. 2014;51:33-40. DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2014.05.007. PMID: 24874439.
64. Wheeler WM. Ants - their structure, development and behavior. New York: Columbia University Press; 1910.
65. Rosell RC, Wheeler DE. Storage function and ultrastructure of the adult fat body in
                        workers of the ant Camponotus festinatus (Buckley)
                        (Hymenoptera : Formicidae). *Int J Insect Morphol Embryol*. 1995;24:413-426. DOI: 10.1016/0020-7322(95)00008-R.
66. 
67. Sorensen AA, Busch TM, Vinson SB. Control of food influx by temporal subcastes in the fire ant, Solenopsis
                        invicta. *Behav Ecol Sociobiol*. 1985;17:191-198. DOI: 10.1007/BF00300136.
68. Tschinkel WR. Sociometry and sociogenesis of colonies of the harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex
                        badius: worker characteristics in relation to colony size and
                        season. *Insect Soc*. 1998;45:385-410. DOI: 10.1007/s000400050097.
69. Silberman RE, Gordon D, Ingram KK. Nutrient stores predict task behaviors in diverse ant species. *Insect Soc*. 2016;63:299-307. DOI: 10.1007/s00040-016-0469-z.
70. Brian MV. Brood-rearing behaviour in small cultures of the ant Myrmica
                        rubra L. *Anim Behav*. 1974;22:879-889. DOI: 10.1016/0003-3472(74)90011-6.
71. http://antcat.org/. 
72. 
73. Hughes L, Westoby MT, Jurado E. Convergence of elaiosomes and insect prey: evidence from ant
                        foraging behaviour and fatty acid composition. *Funct Ecol*. 1994;8:358-365. DOI: 10.2307/2389829.
74. Reifenrath K, Becker C, Poethke HJ. Diaspore trait preferences of dispersing ants. *J Chem Ecol*. 2012;38:1093-1104. DOI: 10.1007/s10886-012-0174-y. PMID: 22903746.
