# Postgraduate Nursing Students' Expectations of their Supervisors in
                    Iran: A Qualitative Study

**Authors:** Fatemeh Hajihosseini, Mansoureh Zagheri Tafreshi, Meimanat Hosseini, Ahmad Reza Baghestani

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 29628956
- Pmc: PMC5881238
- Publisher-id: IJNMR-23-98
- Doi: 10.4103/ijnmr.IJNMR_50_17

**Categories:**
- Original Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Ppub: 2018

## Abstract

### Background:

Exploring the expectations of postgraduate nursing students from their
                        supervisors is required in order to meet the expectations, raise the general
                        students' satisfaction, and enhance the students' capabilities to the
                        highest degree possible. The present study was conducted to explore the
                        expectations of postgraduate nursing students from their supervisors.

### Materials and Methods:

This qualitative study was done through semi-structured individual interviews
                        with seven PhD students and 14 master's students in two focus groups from
                        three universities in Tehran, Iran. The data were analyzed using the
                        inductive approach and through conventional content analysis.

### Results:

The analysis of the data led to the extraction of five categories (support
                        for the students, good communication skills, professional competence,
                        guiding the students, and professionalism) within 12 subcategories.

### Conclusions:

The results revealed that postgraduate students expect their supervisors not
                        only to guide and support them in education and research but also have good
                        communication skills, be professional, and value professionalism. Therefore,
                        supervisors should try to meet these expectations and offer practical
                        strategies for better realization of their needs.

## Introduction

Nursing education in postgraduate program has a major role in ensuring the adequacy
                of nurses' competence.[1] This academic
                level is particularly important to the nursing profession because studying at the
                master's level leads to an enhanced self-esteem, further personal and professional
                growth, and increased knowledge of nursing theories.[2] In Iran, nursing profession encountered many
                improvements in recent years, and therefore, the number of postgraduate programs at
                the PhD level has increased.[3] Postgraduate
                education places greater emphasis on the students because studies at this level
                require a higher quality of teaching and learning.[
                4] According to accreditation point in nursing school, continuous evaluation
                of nursing education environment is necessary because of its close relationship with
                society health.[5] Nursing schools require
                the best conditions and resources are available in order to well prepare their
                postgraduate students. Supervisors can contribute significantly to the preparation
                of postgraduate students for obtaining academic and clinical experience. In
                postgraduate programs, the students spend an extensive amount of time with their
                supervisors, and this amount of time and the type of relationship established
                between the two parties generate expectations in the students.[6] Supervisors help students acquire professional conduct
                and competence in their professional activities and also guide, advise, and assure
                them of the scholarly quality of their academic pursuits.[7] The role of supervisors is also integral to
                postgraduate studies for other reasons.

Postgraduate students are faced with many problems; therefore, it is necessary for
                supervisors to spend sufficient time with the students to attend to their needs.
                Lewallen and Kohlenberg (2011)[8] argued
                that the shortage of teachers ready to supervise students in nursing schools is
                exacerbated by the increasing number of nursing PhD programs. Students happen to be
                directly in contact with the teachers to have valuable information on this subject
                and are also the stakeholders of the educational environment and have a valuable
                role in teaching and learning processes.[9]
                Postgraduate students experience the educational environment from beginning to end,
                so their view can be valuable. Ability of the nursing school in meeting the
                students' needs in educational environment is one of the criteria in evaluation of
                faculty effectiveness.[10] Assessing the
                students' expectations of supervisors through quantitative methods means accessing
                limited perspectives that do not fully uncover the underlying factors at play, the
                strengths and weaknesses of the system, and helpful strategies to overcome the
                problems. Considering that qualitative approaches and interviews held with
                postgraduate students offer the chance of fully understanding the subject, a
                qualitative approach seems the best choice for studying this subject. Precisely, for
                these reasons and also given the importance of the students' expectations of the
                supervisors and the insufficient number of qualitative studies in this field, the
                present study was conducted to explore the expectations of postgraduate nursing
                students from the supervisors.

## Material and Methods

This qualitative study on inductive approach was conducted using conventional content
                analysis during 2014–2015. The participants consisted of postgraduate
                nursing students (Masters and PhD students) from Shahid Beheshti University of
                Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran and were selected through purposive sampling. The
                participating students had spent at least one semester with their current supervisor
                and were selected with maximum diversity in terms of gender, age, work experience,
                academic term, and nursing discipline at the postgraduate level. Being an exchange
                student from other universities was the only exclusion criterion.Table 1 presents participants' details.

Semi-structured, face-to-face, individual interviews were held with the PhD students.
                Focus groups discussion for master's students was selected as a way of obtaining
                more specific opinion and ideas of students about their expectations of supervisors.
                The time and place of the interviews were set according to participants'
                preferences. After making the necessary arrangements with the research team, the
                first interview was conducted with a PhD student, with whom one of the researchers
                was acquainted as a key informant with ample knowledge about the study subject and a
                willingness to participate in the study. The participants were asked to speak freely
                and express their expectations of their supervisors. The questions asked included:

What expectations did you have of your supervisors when you were in contact with
                them? What are your feelings about how the guidance of professors?

When required, appropriate follow-up questions, such as “Please expand on
                this subject” and “What did you mean by this?” were used.
                The interviews continued until the saturation of the data, when no further new
                categories could be extracted.[11] The
                interviews were transcribed in the shortest possible time after recording. Each
                individual interview lasted 20 to 60 min with mean of 40 min. The two focus group
                interviews lasted for 45 (6 students) to 57 min (8 students). The saturation of data
                was reached after seven individual and two focus group interviews.

The data obtained were analyzed using conventional content analysis based on the
                steps proposed by Graneheim and Lundman (2004). First, the interviews were
                transcribed verbatim, and then the initial codes (related ideas and concepts) were
                obtained after choosing the meaning units and reviewing them a number of times. The
                similar codes were then collected and named under one
                “subcategory.”[12] To
                ensure the trustworthiness of the data, Guba and Lincoln's criteria were used.[11] The credibility of the data was ensured
                by interviewing students from different schools at different times. A member check
                was also performed to confirm the data and the extracted or integrated codes. The
                data were reviewed by two experts in qualitative studies for ensuring the
                consistency of the categories with participants' statements. For ensuring the
                dependability of the data, an external check established whether others would reach
                the same conclusion or not. The transferability of the data was achieved by
                distributing the text of some of the interviews and some of the subcategories and
                categories among two nonparticipating experts in qualitative studies (peer check).
                For confirmability, data collection and analysis took about 10 months (October
                2014–July 2015) with prolong engagement for immersing in data and analyzing
                them with research team. In spite of enough explanation to participants, researchers
                tried to maintain the neutrality and prevented personal bias to achieve
                confirmability.

## Ethical consideration

The subjects were fully briefed on the study objectives and methods and were
                    ensured of their right to withdraw from the study at any stage before submitting
                    their informed consents. To this end, the cellphone number and e-mail address of
                    one of the researchers were distributed among them to contact if they wished to
                    withdraw. They were also ensured of the confidentiality of the data and the
                    storage of the documents. An approval was obtained (code of ethics:
                    IR.SBMU.PHNM.1394.214) and the participants were given a letter of introduction
                    from the university.

## Results

The analysis of the data led to the extraction of 764 codes, 12 subcategories, and
                five categories. Table 2 presents the meaning
                units, the condensed meaning units, the codes, and the subcategories. Table 3 presents the initial codes, the
                categories, and the subcategories extracted.

## Support for the students

The participants expected support of both emotional and academic type from their
                    supervisors.

## Emotional support

The majority of the participants stated that their problems were a
                        combination of employment and academic issues and family responsibilities,
                        and expected to receive emotional support. A PhD student said: “I
                        expect the supervisor to take into account the fact that students are also
                        employed, mothers and spouses. There are a lot of other pressures as well.
                        So they should understand us …” (P7; 50 y/o).

## Academic support

The students also expected the supervisors to be available for meeting
                        academic support. A PhD student revealed: “It was always
                        difficult to arrange to see my supervisor, who could never give me an enough
                        appointment and make time for me” (P3; 29 y/o).

## Good communication skills

The students expected their supervisor to be able to establish a good
                    relationship not just with them but also with other teachers inside and outside
                    the school.

## Proper relationship with the students

The students expected the teachers to establish a good relationship with
                        them. A postgraduate student discussed her expectations: “My
                        teacher has an excellent rapport, is very friendly, yet extremely strict and
                        serious, but friendly” (Focus group 1; 28 y/o).

## Proper relationships with other teachers

The students expected their supervisors to establish good relationships with
                        other teachers at their school. The majority argued that the relationship
                        between their supervisor and the other teachers affected their own
                        performance as well. A postgraduate student explained: “My
                        supervisor's relationship with others is a stressful subject for me. I
                        constantly worry about who is going to be my observer or my advisor and how
                        my supervisor's relationship is with these people” (Focus
                        group 2; a 27 y/o).

## Establishing contact with other schools

The students noted that they expected their supervisors to be able to
                        establish a good relationship with other schools. A PhD student said:
                        “Because of my supervisor, I was able to experience a good
                        relationship with foreign universities and teachers… This really
                        widened my horizons” (P5; a 32 y/o).

## Professional competence

Professional competence was one of the main expectations discussed by the
                    students.

## Ethical behavior

The teachers' ethical behavior was very important to the students. A PhD
                        student said: “He/she was very well-behaved, and I felt that
                        he/she was a well-respected person, very knowledgeable but modest. I mean,
                        we saw in him/her all the virtues that humans should possess”
                        (P3; a 29 y/o).

## Professional knowledge

The students expected their supervisors to have expertise in the academic
                        subjects related to their field of research. A PhD student said: “We
                        expect the supervisors to be an expert in what they say, but this is not the
                        case…” (P3; a 29 y/o).

## Work experience

The students expected their supervisors to have teaching, research, and
                        clinical experience. On some of the supervisors' inexperience, a PhD student
                        revealed: “I felt that he/she had not written even one
                        article by himself/herself to know how to write a paper at all…”
                        (P7; a 50 y/o).

## Guiding the students

A supervisor's work is based on guidance, as suggested by the term
                    “supervisor.” This guidance includes both an educational and a
                    research aspect.

## Educational guidance

The students expect to receive adequate educational guidance. A student
                        commented: “Sometimes I felt that the supervisor wasn't
                        sufficiently adept at the subject. Then how is he/she going to guide me?”
                        (Focus group 2; a 28 y/o).

## Research guidance

Research guidance was another aspect of guidance expected by the students.
                        The students said that they expected to be guided in all the aspects of the
                        research for their thesis. A PhD student explained: “My
                        supervisor was excellent. When I proposed my research title, he/she enriched
                        my proposal, and treated me the same way throughout the entire course of my
                        thesis”(P5; a 32 y/o).

## Professionalism

The students stressed the supervisors' endeavor to promote the nursing profession
                    and hold postgraduate studies in high regard.

## Making an effort to promote the nursing profession

The students expected the supervisors to take measures to promote the nursing
                        profession and solve its problems. A PhD student said: “The
                        easiest thing for a supervisor who wants to give postgraduate students a
                        thesis is that he/she be involved in different nursing contexts. It is
                        better if they focus on actual nursing problems” (P3; a 29
                        y/o).

## Holding postgraduate studies in high regard

The students expected the supervisors to hold postgraduate nursing studies in
                        high regard. On expecting postgraduate studies in nursing to be held in high
                        regard by the supervisors, a PhD student said: “He/she made
                        you feel like an undergraduate students rather than a PhD student”
                        (P4; a 30 y/o).

## Discussion

This study was conducted to explain the postgraduate nursing students' expectations
                of their supervisors. The findings suggest that the students expect their
                supervisors to guide and support them, have good communication skills, be
                professional, and value professionalism.

In the present study, the students stated that they were faced with several academic
                problems and they expected their supervisors to give them emotional and educational
                support. Evans and Stevenson (2011)[13]
                reported support from the supervisor as a positive experience in nursing PhD
                students. Essa (2011)[14] reported the
                teachers' support of students as key factors in shaping the learning experiences of
                postgraduate students. The interviews revealed that postgraduate students are faced
                with many challenges. Lee (2009)[15]
                reported students' experiences of postgraduate studies and stated that students need
                more emotional support from their school, especially from their supervisors. The
                students also revealed educational support as their expectation and considered
                improved levels of knowledge and skills, strengthened critical thinking, and
                improved motivation during their studies as part of the support they expected.
                Students' capabilities while studying and when graduating can symbolize the school's
                efforts to promote the nursing community's knowledge. A supportive environment is
                essential for a more successful and effective experience of learning.[16]

Supervisors' communication skills comprise another expectation of the students that
                involved both proper communication with the students themselves as well as with
                other teachers and also encompassed extra-organizational communication. Evans and
                Stevenson (2011)[13] proposed that the
                students' communication with the teachers comprises one of the most important
                learning experiences of postgraduate students. In the present study, the students
                expected their supervisors to have friendly relationships with them and to show them
                a colleague-like attitude. Spaulding and Rockinson-Szpakiw (2012)[17] reported the role of the school, especially that of
                the teachers and supervisors, as one of the factors encouraging the students to stay
                at a given university. In fact, the nature of the students' relationship with their
                supervisor can largely affect the progress of their thesis.

Another expectation the students had of their supervisors with regard to
                communication skills was to form a proper relationship with other teachers. In a
                study conducted by Lombart et al. (2014), professional
                relationships between teachers affected the atmosphere perceived by the students as
                well.[18] The students also expected their
                supervisors to be in touch with sources outside of their own school and to guide the
                students in that direction too. Interdisciplinary research and collaborations in
                nursing have increased in the modern world of science as a result of nurses'
                research activities for solving complex and multidimensional health problems.[19] Postgraduate students who conduct their
                research in extensive fields, therefore need to receive adequate guidance from their
                supervisors.

Professional competence was another expectation the students had of their supervisors
                that involved knowledge, experience, and ethical behavior. Because teachers are the
                scientific pole of a school, their competence facilitates the realization of an
                important part of the goals set for postgraduate education. These goals can include
                enhancing the knowledge of nursing theories and their application and increasing the
                ability to debate and make decisions.[14]
                Schools try to make the students develop their knowledge, skills, and capabilities.[20] To develop these elements, students need
                to be guided by competent teachers. Aghamolaei et al. (2014)[21] argued that teachers are one of the key
                elements in the process of education who play a major role in the realization of the
                educational goals. In the present study, all the participants stressed the
                importance of knowledge in their teachers and considered it one of their main
                expectations from the supervisors.

The extensive scope of the student–supervisor relationship reveals the need
                for supervisors' ethical behavior. Students tend to look for appropriate role models
                for learning values, attitudes, and behaviors.[22]
                A teacher's ethical behavior in establishing relationships with the department
                director and other colleagues and commitment to better taking care of different
                matters and solving the existing problems make them work harder toward gaining full
                competence. A teacher's professional conduct helps with the thriving of the students
                and the entire profession of nursing.[23]
                As role models for the students, ethical principles can have a role in forming
                effective mutual relationships between the students and the faculty members and can
                also ensure the quality of the teaching–learning process at school and
                increase faculty members' commitment to the students and accountability toward their
                needs.[24] The participants argued that
                supervisors should have sufficient experience in different areas, including
                teaching, research, clinical work, and management. In a qualitative study,
                Aghamolaei et al. (2014)[21]
                argued that the presence of experienced and adept teachers leads to a better
                academic experience in the educational environment. In line with the findings of the
                present study, Navabi et al. (2010)[25] also described experience and prowess as markers of a
                good supervisor.

Guidance was another expectation the students had of their supervisors; in their
                view, guidance involved both an educational and a research aspect. In the study by
                Evans and Stevenson (2011),[13] the
                students considered educational guidance and mastery of the subject in questioning
                as some of the attributes of a good supervisor. Lee (2009)[15] argued that the quality of the guidance the students
                receive has a major role in preventing their withdrawal from studies. As frequently
                noted in the interviews, proper educational guidance was important enough to the
                participants to prevent their confusion.

Another dimension of guidance was research guidance. At the postgraduate level,
                research is so crucial that it is arguably one of the most important goals of
                studying. Proper research guidance is one of the main pillars of the implementation
                of a successful postgraduate nursing program.[26]
                The participants of the present study considered research guidance as a necessity of
                postgraduate education, because nurses are professional and knowledgeable people who
                highly need to integrate their body of knowledge and practice for providing
                high-quality healthcare in an evidence-based interdisciplinary environment.[27] This finding further highlights the need
                for research guidance by supervisors. According to the participants' statements, the
                students' guidance should incorporate all the stages of research, from choosing a
                research subject to its final defense and even through the publication of the
                articles.

The students also expected professionalism from their supervisors. The supervisors
                are expected to try to promote the nursing profession and hold postgraduate studies
                in nursing in high regard. The students expected to be introduced to actual nursing
                issues, because, as noted in the interviews, most postgraduate nursing students have
                teaching or clinical experience and understand the real problems of the profession
                and are concerned about promoting the status of their profession. Modern nursing
                education should seek to find real and attainable solutions to professional problems
                and thus help develop a professional identity in the students.[22] The students also referred to the society's high
                expectations of them when they studied at the postgraduate level and stated that
                they needed to be professional precisely for this reason. The participants proposed
                supervisors' high regard for postgraduate studies as one of their most important
                expectations. The limitation of time and access to maximum variance of participants
                from other universities out of Tehran may affect the generalization of results.

## Conclusion

The present findings showed that students expect the supervisors to have professional
                competence and good communication skills and abide by the principles of
                professionalism while guiding and supporting the students. Supervisors can use the
                findings of this study to better learn about their weaknesses and strengths and
                improve the quality of their work. The authorities should also provide strategies
                for meeting these expectations.

## Financial support and sponsorship

Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences.

## Conflicts of interest

Nothing to declare.

## Tables


**Keywords:**
Education, Iran, nursing, qualitative study, supervision

**Copyright:** Copyright: © 2018 Iranian Journal of Nursing and
                    Midwifery Research

## References

1 Rautiainen E, Vallimies-Patomäki M. A review of the organization, regulation, and financing practices
                        of postgraduate education in clinical nursing in 12 European countries. *Nurse Educ Today*. 2016;36:96-104. DOI: 
2 Cotterill-Walker SM. Where is the evidence that master's level nursing education makes
                        a difference to patient care? A literature review. *Nurse Educ Today*. 2012;32:57-64. DOI: 
3 Farsi Z, Dehghan-Naery N, Negarandeh R, Broomand S. Nursing profession in Iran: An overview of opportunities and
                        challenges. *Jpn J Nurs Sci*. 2010;7:9-18. DOI: 
4 Roff S, McAleer SR S. What is educational climate?. *Med Teach*. 2001;23:333-4. DOI: 
5 Naseri N, Salehi SH. Accreditation of nursing education in Iran: Documenting the
                        process. *Iran J Nurs Miwifery Res*. 2007;:136-8. DOI: 
6 Haraldseid C, Friberg F, Aase K. Nursing students' perceptions of factors influencing their
                        learning environment in a clinical skills laboratory: A qualitative study. *Nurse Educ Today*. 2015;35:e1-6. DOI: 
7 Sidhu GK, Kaur S, Fook CY, Yunus FW. Postgraduate supervision: Comparing student perspectives from
                        Malaysia and the United Kingdom. *Procedia Soc Behav Sci*. 2014;123:151-9. DOI: 
8 Lewallen LP, Kohlenberg E. Preparing the nurse scientist for academia and industry. *Nurs Educ Perspect*. 2011;32:22-5. DOI: 
9 Imanipour M, Sadooghiasl A, Ghiyasvandian S, Haghani H. Evaluating the educational environment of a nursing school by
                        using the DREEM inventory. *Glob J Health Sci*. 2015;7:211-6. DOI: 
10 Salehi SH, Taleghani F, Afghari P, Moghadasi MH. Investigating the efficiency of nursing education program from
                        the perspective of graduate students of nursing and midwifery. *Iran J Nurs Miwifery Res*. 2012;17:284-9. DOI: 
11 Strubert HJ, Carpenter DR. . *Qualitative research in nursing: Advancing the humanistic imperative*. 2011;:-. DOI: 
12 Graneheim UH, Lundman B. Qualitative content analysis in nursing research: Concepts,
                        procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness. *Nurs Educ Today*. 2004;24:105-12. DOI: 
13 Evans C, Stevenson K. The experience of international nursing students studying for a
                        PhD in the UK: A qualitative study. *BMC Nurs*. 2011;10:11-. DOI: 
14 Essa I. Reflecting on some of the challenges facing postgraduate nursing
                        education in South Africa. *Nurse Educ Today*. 2011;31:253-8. DOI: 
15 Lee NJ. Professional doctorate supervision: Exploring student and
                        supervisor experiences. *Nurse Educ Today*. 2009;29:641-8. DOI: 
16 Al-Kabbaa AF, Ahmad HH, Saeed AA, Abdalla AM, Mustafa AA. Perception of the learning environment by students in a new
                        medical school in Saudi Arabia: Areas of concern. *J Taibah Univ Sci*. 2012;7:69-75. DOI: 
17 Spaulding LS, Rockinson-Szapkiw AJ. Hearing their voices: Factors doctoral candidates attribute to
                        their persistence. *Int J Doct Stud*. 2012;7:199-219. DOI: 
18 Lombarts KM, Heineman MJ, Scherpbier AJ, Arah OA. Effect of the learning climate of residency programs on faculty's
                        teaching performance as evaluated by residents. *PLoS One*. 2014;9:e86512-. DOI: 
19 Kim M, Lee H, Kim H, Ahn Y, Kim E, Yun S. Quality of faculty, curriculum and resources for nursing doctoral
                        education in Korea: A focus group study. *Int J Nurs Stud*. 2010;47:295-306. DOI: 
20 Dinther MD, Segers M. Factors affecting students self-efficacy in higher education. *Educ Res Rev*. 2011;6:95-108. DOI: 
21 Aghamolaei T, Shirazi M, Dadgaran I, Shahsavari H, Ghanbarnejad A. Health students' expectations of the ideal educational
                        environment: A qualitative research. *J Advanc Med Educ Prof*. 2014;2:151-7. DOI: 
22 Altiok H, Üstün B. Meaning of professionalism in nursing students. *American Int J Soc Sci*. 2014;3:33-. DOI: 
23 Ashgholi Farahani M, Rafii F, Emamzadeh Ghasemi HS. Contributing factors in attainment of teaching competency for
                        nursing instructors: A qualitative study. *Iran J Med Educ*. 2013;13:766-79. DOI: 
24 Sheikhzakaryaie N, Atashzadeh-Shoorideh F. The relationship between professional ethics and organizational
                        commitment of faculty members in Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences. *Advanc Nurs Midwif*. 2015;25:21-30. DOI: 
25 Navabi N, Jahanian E, Haji Ahmadi M, Parvaneh M. Criteria for a desirable teacher from the view point of students
                        of Babol University of Medical Sciences. *J Babol Univ Med Sci*. 2010;12:7-13. DOI: 
26 Ellenbecker CH, Kazmi M. BS-PhD programs in nursing: Where are we now?. *Nurs Educ Perspec*. 2014;35:230-7. DOI: 
27 Cheraghi MA, Jasper M, Vaismoradi M. Clinical nurses' perceptions and expectations of the role of
                        doctorally-prepared nurses: A qualitative study in Iran. *Nurs Educ Pract*. 2014;14:18-23. DOI: 
