# Lignins and Their Derivatives with Beneficial Effects on Human Health

**Authors:** Maria Pilar Vinardell, Montserrat Mitjans, Araceli García, Luis Serrano

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 28590454
- Pmc: PMC5486042
- Doi: 10.3390/ijms18061219
- Publisher-id: ijms-18-01219

**Categories:**
- Review

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 07-6-2017
- Collection: 6-2017

## Abstract

A review of the pharmacological applications of lignins provides evidence of
                    their protective role against the development of different diseases. In many
                    cases, the effects of lignins could be explained by their antioxidant capacity.
                    Here, we present a systematic review of the literature from the period
                    2010–2016 which provides information concerning new applications of
                    lignins derived from recent research. The most promising findings are reported,
                    including the methodologies employed and results obtained with lignins or their
                    derivatives which may improve human health. We highlight potential applications
                    in the treatment of obesity, diabetes, thrombosis, viral infections and cancer.
                    Moreover, we report both that lignins can be used in the preparation of
                    nanoparticles to deliver different drugs and also their use in photoprotection.

## 1. Introduction

Lignins are present in significant amounts in plants, accounting for 15–25% (
                w/w) of herbaceous biomass. They consequently represent a large amount of
                the waste generated by different industries that use plant matter.

Nowadays, most commercial lignin is obtained as a by-product from lignocellulose
                treatments performed during pulp and paper processing, in the form of
                lignosulfonates and kraft lignins. The most common use of these lignins is in energy
                production, with only a small fraction being used for other commercial applications.
                This is due, in part, to the dispersing, binding and emulsifying properties of
                lignins. However, considerable effort is being made to find new applications of
                lignins, in order to add extra value to them while at the same time potentially
                diversifying biorefinery practices [1].
                Different strategies have thus been developed to valorize lignins, such as
                ultrafiltration as a fractionation process to separate lignin fractions of different
                molecular weights [2].

The heterogeneity of the lignin structure makes it difficult to isolate a specific
                product, and in many cases the result of fractionation is a mixture of products.
                Furthermore, due to the complexity of the lignin structure and the effects of
                pretreatments on it, identifying and extracting chemicals from lignin requires
                extensive characterization to understand its polymeric properties and linkages, as
                well as the properties of the functional groups connected to the aromatic ring. The
                components of the lignin macromolecule together with its characterization suggest
                the predominance of antioxidant monomers [3]. A recent study found that low-molecular-weight
                monomers derived from hydroxycinnamic acids and guaiacyl units are responsible for
                the antioxidant properties of lignins [
                4].

The precise chemical structure of lignin is not known, both because of its complex
                polymeric nature and also due to the degree of random coupling involved in the
                arrangement of the macromolecule. Considerable work has been done on the detailed
                structural characterization of these complex natural polymers to gain an
                understanding of their structure and function. The composition, molecular weight,
                and amount of lignin differ from plant to plant, with lignin abundance generally
                decreasing in the order: softwoods > hardwoods > grasses. The
                components are joined by β-O-4, 5−5, β-5,
                4-O-5, β-1, dibenzodioxocin, and
                β−β linkages, among others, of which the β-O-4
                linkage is dominant, accounting for more than half of the linkage structures of
                lignin [5] as shown in Figure 1.

Lignin is a very good candidate for the development of new materials due to the
                presence of phenolic and aliphatic hydroxyl groups in its structure. These confer
                considerable potential for chemical modification [6] on the macromolecule.

Alkali lignin is currently the largest lignin class to have been produced. It a
                co-product of biofuel and the paper industry which is separated from fibers by
                chemical pulping (mainly soda and sulfite) but is of less value than the primary
                products [7].

Some old studies show that lignins are involved in different biological activities.
                These include reducing serum cholesterol by binding to bile acids in the intestine [8], and preventing tumor
                development as demonstrated in rats exposed to an intestinal carcinogen
                3,2-dimethyl-4-ami-nobiphenyl and fed a lignin diet [9].

We previously reviewed the pharmacological applications of lignins and different
                products obtained from them; our results were published in 2012 and provide evidence
                of lignans playing a protective role against the development of different diseases [10]. In many cases, the effects
                of lignins could be explained by their antioxidant capacity.

Here, we now report a systematic review of the literature over the period
                2010–2016 which provides information on new applications of lignins derived
                from recent research. We give details of the most promising findings, describing the
                methodologies employed and the results obtained with lignins or their derivatives
                which may improve human health.

## 2. Pharmacological Activities of Lignins and Their Derivatives

## 2.1. Lignins and Lignosulfonic Acid for the Treatment of Diabetes

Lignins can be obtained via different processes. One strategy is to obtain
                    biomodified alkali lignin extracted from the deciduous plant Acacia
                    nilotica. The extracted alkali lignin can then be subjected to
                    microbial biotransformation by the ligninolytic fungi Aspergillus flavus
                    and Emericella nidulans. The results obtained using this method
                    demonstrate that the structure and functional modifications of the lignin
                    significantly affect its antioxidant bioefficacy and reduce its antidiabetic
                    activities [11]. However,
                    the modified alkali lignin showed significant in vitro α-amylase
                    inhibitory activity [12],
                    thereby indicating that it potentially has anti-hyperglycemic properties.
                    Moreover, the functional and structural modifications of alkali lignin altered
                    the efficiency of its binding with the glucose molecule. This affected its
                    movement across the cellular membrane and improved glycemic control by limiting
                    postprandial glucose absorption. In conclusion, the antioxidant properties,
                    α-amylase activity and in vitro glucose movement inhibition of A.
                    nilotica lignin may offer a potential therapeutic source for the
                    treatment of oxidative stress and diabetes [11].



The effect of lignosulfonic acid on intestinal glucose absorption was also
                    studied recently [15]. It
                    was shown that lignosulfonic acid is a reversible and non-competitive inhibitor
                    of α-glucosidase, indicating that it can bind to both the enzyme and
                    enzyme-substrate complex. This inhibitory effect on α-glucosidase
                    activity was enhanced by preincubation of the lignosulfonic acid with the
                    enzyme, involving slow binding. The administration of glucose and lignosulfonic
                    acid induced a delay in glucose uptake compared to administration of glucose
                    alone and a reduction in blood glucose concentration. This suggests inhibition
                    of glucose transport through the intestine, based also on the results observed
                    in vitro using Caco-2 cells, where lignosulfonic acid significantly inhibited
                    the uptake of 2-deoxyglucose. The authors suggested that lignins and
                    lignosulfonic acid could be used in the treatment of diabetes.

Other potentially beneficial effects of lignosulfonic acid have been studied for
                    the treatment of diabetes. Lignosulfonic acid has been demonstrated to inhibit
                    mitotic clonal expansion of 3T3-L1 preadipocyte cells in vitro (Figure 2). Moreover, feeding
                    lignosulfonic acid to KK-Ay diabetic mice suppressed the increase of serum
                    glucose levels seen in untreated control animals [16].

## 2.2. Lignophenols in Obesity Control

Lignophenols (LPs), which are lignin derivatives, were first isolated many years
                    ago using a phase-separation system [17]. Their chemical structure is similar to that of
                    natural lignin. Although LPs are known to be highly phenolic and highly stable,
                    and also to exhibit antioxidant properties in vitro [18], their physiological role
                    remains unclear.

LPs derived from bamboo were reported to prevent hydrogen peroxide-induced cell
                    death in vitro [19]. LPs
                    reduced oleate-induced apolipoprotein-B secretion and sterol regulatory element
                    binding protein-2 in HepG2 cells. Meanwhile, treatment with LPs significantly
                    decreased oleate-induced apo-B secretion from HepG2 cells in a dose-dependent
                    manner. At least in part, LPs may attenuate apo-B secretion by decreasing the
                    rate of exit from the rough endoplasmic reticulum, which is controlled by the
                    microsomal triglyceride transfer protein. Moreover, LPs reduce the amount of
                    cholesterol in HepG2 in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 3) [20].

Moreover, LPs attenuated the excess oxidative stress, infiltration and activation
                    of macrophages, as well as glomerular expansion in the kidneys of
                    streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats [21]. However, there is limited information on the
                    potential beneficial effects of a LP rich diet on diet-induced obesity. In
                    conclusion, it has been demonstrated that LP treatment suppresses adipose
                    tissues, plasma triglyceride levels, and hepatic expression of SREBP-1c mRNA in
                    rats fed a high-fat diet. However, the mechanism underlying the effects of LP
                    treatment on lipid metabolism in diet-induced obesity should be studied further,
                    as the results may facilitate the formulation of preventive care strategies for
                    obesity [22].

## 2.3. Lignosulfonic Acid with Antiviral Activity

Lignosulfonic acid (LA) is a low-cost lignin-derived polyanionic macromolecule.
                    It is derived from the sulfite pulping of softwood used in the paper industry
                    and is also used as a raw material in the production of artificial vanilla
                    flavor, vanillin [23].

The antiviral activity of lignosulfonic acid has been studied in vivo and in
                    vitro. Lignosulfonic acid exhibits potent and consistent broad-spectrum anti-HIV
                    activity in the lower μM range, showing low, if any, cytotoxicity in
                    replication and co-cultivation assays. The in vivo studies were performed in
                    infected mice by exposing scarified skin to an HSV-2 G suspension. The
                    development of lesions and mortality were recorded over 25 days. Primary lesions
                    developed at the site of inoculation and the severity of the infection was
                    scored based on the number and size of the lesions [24].

Different cells were also used such as a human T-cell leukemia cell line (MT-4),
                    human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
                    (PBMCs) infected with HIV. The in vitro and in vivo results of inhibition of
                    both HIV (Figure 4) and HSV
                    transmission and infection by lignosulfonic acid, together with its high
                    availability and safety profile, make it a very promising antiviral candidate [25].

Lignosulfonic acid also exhibits potent and broad activity against HIV-1 isolates
                    of diverse subtypes, including two North America strains and a number of Chinese
                    clinical isolates. Therapeutic viral reverse transcriptase inhibitor has
                    successfully been tested in clinical trials and it has been demonstrated to be
                    safe and effective in preventing sexual transmission of HIV-1 [26]. The synergistic effects
                    of lignosulfonic acid in combination with a number of reverse transcriptase
                    inhibitors, together with its low toxicity to epithelial cells, make
                    lignosulfonic acid an interesting candidate as a topical microbicide. Topical
                    application of lignosulfonic acid, opposed to systemic use, would avoid the low
                    capacity to penetrate blood barriers and toxicity to lymphocytes [27]. Lignosulfonic acid shows
                    no adverse effect on epithelial integrity and on the tight junction protein
                    expression. Furthermore, it modulates inflammatory cytokine expression.
                    Moreover, lignosulfonic acid did not disturb the growth of lactobacillus, an
                    important component of vaginal microflora. Together, these results suggest that
                    lignosulfonic acid deserves to be studied further as a topical microbicide
                    candidate [28].

## 2.4. Lignin–Carbohydrate Complexes as Antiviral Agents and
                    Immunomodulators

Lignin and carbohydrate molecules can be physically or chemically bonded to each
                    other, mainly by covalent bonds. In wood, these complexes consist of ester and
                    ether linkages through sugar hydroxyl to the α-carbanol of phenylpropane
                    subunits in lignin. Water-soluble lignin–carbohydrate complexes (LCCs)
                    often precipitate during digestion with polysaccharidases, and the residual
                    sugars are more diverse than the bulk hemicellulose [29]. They can be obtained
                    from different sources, such as sugarcane bagasse [30].

LCCs have been prepared by sequential alkaline extraction and acid precipitation
                    from pinecones and pine nut shells, as well as from extracts of Lentinus
                    edodes mycelia and Sasa senanensis Rehder leaves. They
                    show excellent anti-UV activity [
                    31,32] and so they
                    could be used in cosmetic sun care products [33].

Pinecone LCC from Prunella vulgaris with a molecular weight of
                    8500 has been reported to show anti-herpes activity, by inhibiting viral binding
                    and penetration [34]. More
                    recent work suggested that LCCs from P. anisum show antiviral
                    activities against the herpes simplex virus, human cytomegalovirus and the
                    measles virus [35].

LCCs protected cells from the cytopathic effects of HIV infection and UV
                    irradiation more efficiently than other polyphenols. Limited digestion of LCCs
                    suggests that the lignin moiety is involved in the prominent anti-HIV activity;
                    whereas the carbohydrate moiety may function in immunopotentiating activity
                    through a cell surface receptor [
                    36].

LCCs prepared from cacao husk and cacao mass also present anti-HIV activity, with
                    that from cacao husk showing greater activity. Moreover, they synergistically
                    enhance the superoxide anion and hydroxyl radical-scavenging activity of vitamin
                    C, and stimulate nitric oxide generation by mouse macrophage-like cells
                    (RAW264.7) [37]. In
                    accordance with these findings, LCCs seem to be a chemical class that shows
                    biological antiviral activities and immunomodulatory effects.

Two carboxylated lignins based on a 4-hydroxy cinnamic acid scaffold were
                    synthesized using enzymatic oxidative coupling. They have been studied in HeLa
                    cells infected with herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1). The two carboxylated lignins
                    were found to inhibit HSV-1 entry into mammalian cells and to be more potent
                    than sulfated lignins [38].

## 2.5. Low-Molecular-Weight Lignins as Anticoagulant and Anti-Emphysema Agents

An old study demonstrated the anticoagulant activity of sulfonated lignins [39]. More recently, in one
                    approach to designing new anticoagulants with a dual hydrophobic and anionic
                    nature, sulfated low-molecular-weight variants of lignins were prepared as
                    functional mimetics of low-molecular-weight heparin [40].

Sulfated low-molecular-weight lignins (LMWLs) are composed of oligomeric chains
                    of varying lengths and contain different intermonomeric linkages, such as
                    β-O-4 and β-5.

Mechanistically, the sulfated LMWLs were found to act via a novel anticoagulation
                    mechanism involving exosite II-mediated allosteric inhibition of thrombin [41].

Overall, the chemo-enzymatic origin of sulfated LMWL, coupled with dual plasmin
                    and thrombin inhibition properties, presents novel opportunities for designing
                    new pharmaceutical agents that could regulate complex pathologies in which both
                    systems are known to play important roles [42].

Sulfated LMWLs (Figure 5)
                    represent a totally novel class of anticoagulants, which utilize the heparin
                    binding domain to induce allosteric inhibition of a variety of serine
                    coagulation proteases. Although other ligands have been reported to bind to the
                    heparin binding site of serine coagulation proteases, none has exhibited a
                    direct anticoagulant effect [43
                    ].

Sulfated β-O-lignins have been recently discovered as
                    anticoagulants. They simultaneously induce anticoagulation and antiplatelet
                    actions by targeting exosite 2 of thrombin to reduce fibrinogen cleavage through
                    allostery and compete with glycoprotein Iba to reduce platelet activation [44].

Based on the results obtained with LMWLs as anticoagulants with potent inhibitory
                    effects on blood serine proteases, factor Xa and thrombin, a recent study
                    propose the use of these lignins in the treatment of emphysema. Emphysema is one
                    of the major pathological manifestations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
                    disease, which causes high morbidity and mortality worldwide. Elastolysis,
                    oxidative stress and inflammation in different lung cells have been suggested as
                    three major pathogenic mechanisms causing emphysema [45]. Another recent study
                    described novel unsulfated or sulfated LMWLs prepared from three
                    4-hydroxycinnamic acids, caffeic acid, ferulic acid and sinapic acid. They
                    possessed potent inhibitory activity against neutrophil elastase, oxidation and
                    inflammation in vitro [46].

## 2.6. Lignin-Based Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery

Some years ago, different authors demonstrated the capacity of nanoparticles
                    (NPs) obtained from lignin for the controlled release of different herbicides
                    and pesticides [47,48]. This potential can be
                    extended to the release of different drugs in human medicine.

NPs from lignin have the advantage of being non-toxic and biodegradable, and for
                    this reason they are suitable for drug delivery and, as stabilizers of cosmetic
                    and pharmaceutical formulations. They can also be used in areas where they may
                    replace more expensive and potentially toxic nanomaterials [49].

Recently, water-dispersed lignin NPs have been developed which can be used to
                    stabilize Pickering emulsions as well as to carry silver ions in antimicrobial
                    applications. These could also be used in drug delivery applications that may
                    include cancer treatments [50
                    ].

Lignin is one of the most abundant biopolymers in nature; it is also naturally
                    biodegradable, biocompatible and presents very good stability. Together, all
                    this makes lignin an ideal precursor for the development of environmentally
                    friendly nanomaterials, in contrast to many other NPs used in anticancer therapy
                    [51].

In addition to their biocompatibility and very good stability, innovative lignin
                    NPs exhibit other important features for drug delivery and biomedical
                    applications (Figure 6).
                    These include the capacity to carry hydrophobic drugs and sustain their release,
                    and good cellular interactions. As a result of their surface structure, lignin
                    NPs can be modified with targeting moieties in order to increase cellular
                    interaction with specific cells, e.g., for cancer therapy. Also, pH-sensitive
                    polymers can be added to lignin-based NPs to allow pH-responsive drug release
                    and possibly loading of hydrophilic drugs. NPs loaded with drugs that are only
                    poorly water soluble, such as benzazulene and sorafenib, or with a water-soluble
                    anticancer drug such as capecitabine, showed inhibitory effects on different
                    cancer cells including MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 (human breast cancer cell lines),
                    PC3-MM2 (a prostate cancer cell line), Caco-2 (colorectal adenocarcinoma).
                    EA.hy926, a non-tumor cell line, was used for comparative purposes [52].

Another demonstrated application of lignin NPs is sun protection. Lignins were
                    obtained from A. tequilana Weber bagasse by soda and organosolv
                    pulping, and then two lignin NPs were synthesized.

The UV absorption of organosolv-type NPs in combination with a neutral vehicle
                    shows similar levels of protection (as expressed by the sun protection factor:
                    SPF) to ZnO NPs; and they were higher than those for soda lignin NPs. The
                    addition of ZnO NPs together with lignin resulted in an additive enhancement of
                    SPF in these formulations, especially with lignin from soda pulping (Figure 7).

Bulk lignin absorbs only one-fourth of the UV intensity absorbed by lignin NPs.
                    This demonstrates the effect of the smaller size on the UV absorption properties
                    of lignin. Although nanosized lignin formulation still requires optimization,
                    initial results suggest a viable new option from sustainable resources for use
                    in photoprotection [53].

Lignin can be coated on silverNPs in order to increase their antibacterial
                    activity. For this application, silica/lignin hybrid materials were first
                    obtained. The silica surface, suitably modified using N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane,
                    and kraft lignin, activated with a solution of a strong oxidizing agent, were
                    bound together in a chemically permanent fashion. Next, silver NPs were grafted
                    onto the surface of the silica/lignin hybrids. Presumably the chemical or ionic
                    nature of the hybrid-silver nanoparticles (NP) bonds provides the high stability
                    of silver NPs, as well as extended longevity of the antibacterial activity. The
                    use of a relatively cheap inorganic material, in combination with lignin, which
                    is a waste product of the paper industry, thus made it possible to create a
                    hybrid material which is as biocompatible as pure silica, but even more
                    cost-efficient. With its surface effectively functionalized with silver NPs, the
                    hybrid material demonstrated antibacterial activity against all the tested
                    species of bacteria. The strongest antimicrobial effect was observed in the case
                    of P. aeruginosa, an opportunistic human pathogen [54].

Chitosan-based delivery systems have been used for the improved delivery and
                    controlled release of peptides, proteins, oligonucleotides and plasmids, by
                    protecting the macromolecules from enzymatic degradation [55]. For the production of
                    chitosan NPs, the addition of an anionic compound is the most common technique,
                    but this is limited by the ionic interaction between chitosan and the anionic
                    compound. For this reason, the use of sulfonated lignin was proposed as a
                    counter ion polymer, to increase the stability of chitosan NPs [56] and to provide
                    antimicrobial activity [57
                    ].

The beneficial effects of lignosulfonate complexes on chitosan NPs were
                    characterized, showing greater stability to lysozyme degradation,
                    biocompatibility with human cells and antimicrobial activity against both
                    Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. The recovery of fibroblasts from
                    cytotoxic effects has been demonstrated, indicating that these NPs can safely be
                    applied to human skin [56].

## 2.7. Other Lignins in Drug Delivery

Lignin from sugarcane has been used to deliver methrotrexate, a drug used in the
                    treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in a rat model. Lignin was deemed to disperse
                    into the intercapillary blood vessels, transporting the drug towards
                    hard-to-target inflamed tissues. In the methrotrexate–lignin drug
                    carrier, the interlayer sheet structure of the lignin matrix, together with the
                    dispensed angstrom-sized cellulosic crystals over the lignin, result in
                    methotrexate being released in cells. Moreover, the methrotrexate-lignin drug
                    delivery system repaired seminiferous tubules [58].

A xanthan and lignin epoxy-modified resin (LER) mixture was crosslinked using
                    epichlorohydrin as the crosslinking agent, leading to superabsorbent hydrogels
                    with a fast swelling rate in aqueous mediums. These hydrogels were tested as
                    carries by the loading/delivery behavior of bisoprolol fumarate, a drug that
                    belongs to the group of medicines called beta-blockers that are used in the
                    treatment of stable chronic heart failure. The amount of drug loaded into the
                    polymer networks was found to range between 14.4% and 19.2%. Drug release was
                    retarded and the release mechanism of the active principle was found to depend
                    on the composition of the matrix [
                    59].

An interesting review of the research performed on the lignin-based controlled
                    release of bioactive materials concluded that the transformed lignin materials
                    may be helpful for studies of water-insoluble drug loading and their release.
                    This can be considered further potential for future value-adding applications of
                    lignins in biomedical fields [60
                    ].

## 2.8. Lignin Metabolites in Cancer

The chaga mushroom, Inonotus obliquus, has been recognized as a remedy for
                    cancer, gastritis, ulcers, and tuberculosis of the bones since the 16th century
                    [61]. Two homogenous
                    carbohydrate–lignin metabolites from water-soluble fractions were
                    obtained and their antiproliferative activity was studied.

Chemical and spectral characterizations indicated that both were lignin
                    metabolites in which carbohydrate constituents made hydrophobic lignin highly
                    water-soluble. Cytotoxicity tests showed that these lignin derivatives induced
                    cell apoptosis, which was largely cell-cycle independent. In addition, both
                    carbohydrate-lignin metabolites inhibited the activation of the nuclear
                    transcription factor NF-κB in cancer cells [62].

## 3. Conclusions

Lignins are obtained from various plants or biomass via a range of processes.
                However, they are generally obtained as a by-product from the black liquor of
                chemical pulping processes. Lignins are currently used to produce energy, through
                great efforts are being made to find new applications of them, since they are
                relatively cheap. Since these readily available plant-derived materials are
                biocompatible, research on their potential use in biomedical applications has
                increased in recent years. In many cases the application of lignins is based on
                their antioxidant capacity. The applications of lignins studied include their
                antiviral and antitumor effects. Moreover, the use of lignins in the development of
                NPs for drug delivery is increasing. Table
                1 shows the main pharmacological activities of lignins and their derivatives.

**Keywords:**
lignin, human health, applicability, antioxidant capacity, antiviral effect

## References

1. Garcia A., Erdocia X., Gonzalez Alriols M., Labidi J.. Physicochemical Properties and Potential Applications of Lignins
                        from Various Sources. *Lignin: Structural Analysis, Applications in Biomaterials and Ecological
                        Significance*. 2014;:127-160.
2. Toledano A., Serrano L., Balu A.M., Luque R., Pineda A., Labidi J.. Fractionation of organosolv lignin from olive tree clippings and
                        its valorization to simple phenolic compounds. *ChemSusChem*. 2013;6:529-536. DOI: 10.1002/cssc.201200755. PMID: 23404837.
3. Pan X., Kadla J.F., Ehara K., Gilkes N., Saddler J.N.. Organosolv ethanol lignin from hybrid poplar as a radical
                        scavenger: Relationship between lignin structure, extraction conditions, and
                        antioxidant activity. *J. Agric. Food Chem.*. 2006;:-. DOI: 10.1021/jf0605392. PMID: 16881681.
4. Azadfar M., Gao A.H., Bule M.V., Chen S.. Structural characterization of lignin: A potential source of
                        antioxidants guaiacol and 4-vinylguaiacol. *Int. J. Biol. Macromol.*. 2015;75:58-66. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.12.049. PMID: 25603142.
5. Zakzeski J., Bruijnincx P.C.A., Jongerius A.L., Weckhuysen B.M.. The Catalytic Valorization of Lignin for the Production of
                        Renewable Chemicals. *Chem. Rev.*. 2010;110:3552-3599. DOI: 10.1021/cr900354u. PMID: 20218547.
6. Kai D., Tan M.J., Chee P.L., Chua Y.K., Yap Y.L., Loh X.J.. Towards lignin-based functional materials in a sustainable world. *Green Chem.*. 2016;18:1175-1200. DOI: 10.1039/C5GC02616D.
7. Ugartondo V., Mitjans M., Vinardell M.P.. Compartive antioxidant and cytotoxic effects of lignins from
                        different sources. *Bioresour. Technol.*. 2008;99:6683-6687. DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2007.11.038. PMID: 18187323.
8. Banard D.L., Heaton K.W.. Bile acids and vitamin A absorption in man: The effect of two
                        bile acid-binding agents, chloestyramine and lignin. *Gut*. 1973;14:316-318. DOI: 10.1136/gut.14.4.316. PMID: 4706914.
9. Reddy B.S., Maeura Y., Wayman M.. Effects of dietary corn bran and autohydrolyzed lignin on
                        3,2′-dimethyl-4-aminobiphenyl-induced intestinal
                        carcinogénesis in male F344 rats. *J. Natl. Cancer Inst.*. 1983;71:419-423. PMID: 6308324.
10. Martinez V., Mitjans M., Vinardell M.P.. Pharmacological applications of lignins and lignins related
                        compounds: An overview. *Curr. Organ. Chem.*. 2012;16:1863-1870. DOI: 10.2174/138527212802651223.
11. Barapatre A., Meena A.S., Mekala S., Das A., Jha H.. In vitro evaluation of antioxidant and cytotoxic activities of
                        lignin fractions extracted from Acacia nilotica. *Int. J. Biol. Macromol.*. 2016;86:443-453. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.01.109. PMID: 26836619.
12. Quesille-Villalobos A.M., Torrico J.S., Ranilla L.G.. Phenolic compounds, antioxidant capacity, and in vitro
                        α-amylase inhibitory potential of tea infusions (Camellia
                        sinensis) commercialized in Chile. *CyTA J. Food*. 2013;11:60-67. DOI: 10.1080/19476337.2012.688219.
13. Kalaivani T., Mathew L.. Free radical scavenging activity from leaves of Acacia
                        nilotica (L.) Wild. ex Delile, an Indian medicinal
                        tree. *Food Chem. Toxicol.*. 2010;48:298-305. DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2009.10.013. PMID: 19837122.
14. Barapatre A., Aadil K.R., Tiwary B.N., Jha H.. In vitro antioxidant and antidiabetic activities of biomodified
                        ligninfrom Acacia nilotica wood. *Int. J. Biol. Macromol.*. 2015;75:81-89. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.01.012. PMID: 25600985.
15. Hasegawa Y., Kadota Y., Hasegawa C., Kawiminami S.. Lignosulfonic acid-induced inhibition of intestinal glucose
                        absorption. *J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol.*. 2015;61:449-454. DOI: 10.3177/jnsv.61.449. PMID: 26875485.
16. Hasegawa Y., Nakagawa E., Kadota Y., Kawiminami S.. Lignosulfonic acid promotes hypertrophy in 3T3-L1 cells without
                        increasing lipid content and increases their 2-deoxyglucose uptake. *Asian-Austalas. J. Anim. Sci.*. 2017;30:111-118. DOI: 10.5713/ajas.16.0253. PMID: 27383805.
17. Funaoka M., Fukatsu S.. Characteristics of lignin structural conversion in a
                        phase-separative reaction system composed of cresol and sulfuric acid. *Holzforschung*. 1996;50:245-252. DOI: 10.1515/hfsg.1996.50.3.245.
18. Fujita S., Ohmae E., Funaoka M.. In Vitro the antioxidant activity of lignophenol from Beech (Fagus
                        crenata Blume) and Hinoki (Cryptomeria japonica D
                        Don). *J. Jpn. Assoc. Diet. Fiber Res.*. 2003;7:245-252.
19. Akao Y., Seki N., Nakagawa Y., Yi H., Matsumoto K., Ito Y., Ito K., Funaoka M., Maruyama W., Naoi M.. A highly bioactive lignophenol derivative from bamboo lignin
                        exhibits a potent activity to suppress apoptosis induced by oxidative stress
                        in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. *Bioorgan. Med. Chem.*. 2004;12:4791-4801. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2004.07.022. PMID: 15336257.
20. Norikura T., Mukai Y., Fujita S., Mikame K., Funaoka M., Sato S.. Lignophenols decrease oleate-induced apolipoprotein-B secretion
                        in HepG2 cells. *Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol.*. 2010;107:813-817. DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-7843.2010.00575.x. PMID: 20412465.
21. Sato S., Mukai Y., Yamate J., Norikura T., Morinaga Y., Mikame K., Funaoka M., Fujita S.. Lignin-derived lignophenols attenuate oxidative and inflammatory
                        damage to the kidney in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. *Free Radic. Res.*. 2009;43:1205-1213. DOI: 10.3109/10715760903247264. PMID: 19905983.
22. Sato S., Mukai Y., Tokuoka Y., Mikame K., Funaoka M., Fujita S.. Effect of lignin-derived lignophenols on hepatic lipid metabolism
                        in rats fed a high-fat diet. *Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol.*. 2012;34:228-234. DOI: 10.1016/j.etap.2012.04.005. PMID: 22561109.
23. Fargues C., Mathias A., Rodrigues A.. Kinetics of Vanillin Production from Kraft Lignin Oxidation. *Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.*. 1996;35:28-36. DOI: 10.1021/ie950267k.
24. Andrei G., Lisco A., Vanpouille C., Introini A., Balestra E., van den Oord J., Cihlar T., Perno C.F., Snoeck R., Margolis L.. Topical tenofovir, a microbicide effective against HIV, inhibits
                        herpes simplex virus-2 replication. *Cell Host Microbe*. 2011;10:379-389. DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.08.015. PMID: 22018238.
25. Gordts S.C., Férir G., D’huys T., Petrova M.I., Lebeer S., Snoeck R., Andrei G., Schols D.. The Low-Cost Compound Lignosulfonic Acid (LA) Exhibits
                        Broad-Spectrum Anti-HIV and Anti-HSV Activity and Has Potential for
                        Microbicidal Applications. *PLoS ONE*. 2015;10:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131219. PMID: 26132818.
26. Karim Q.A., Karim S.S.A., Frohlich J.A., Grobler A.C., Baxter C., Mansoor L.E., Kharsany A.B.M., Sibeko S., Mlisana K.P., Omar Z.. Effectiveness and safety of tenofovir gel, an antiretroviral
                        microbicide for the prevention of HIV infection in women. *Science*. 2010;329:1168-1174. DOI: 10.1126/science.1193748. PMID: 20643915.
27. Tao W., Richards C., Hamer D.. Enhancement of HIV Infection by Cellulose Sulfate. *AIDS Res. Hum. Retrovir.*. 2008;24:925-929. DOI: 10.1089/aid.2008.0043. PMID: 18627218.
28. Qiu M., Wang Q., Chu Y., Yuan Z., Song H., Chen Z., Wu Z.. Lignosulfonic acid exhibits broadly anti-HIV-1 activity-potential
                        as a microbicide candidate for the prevention of HIV-1 sexual transmission. *PLoS ONE*. 2012;7:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035906. PMID: 22558266.
29. Jeffries T.W.. Biodegradation of lignin-carbohydrate complexes. *Biodegradation*. 1990;1:163-176. DOI: 10.1007/BF00058834.
30. Singh R., Singh S., Trimukhe K.D., Pandare K.V., M Bastawade K.B., Gokhale D.V., Varma A.J.. Lignin–carbohydrate complexes from sugarcane bagasse:
                        Preparation, purification, and characterization. *Carbohydr. Polym.*. 2005;62:57-66. DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2005.07.011.
31. Nanbu T., Shimada J., Kobayashi M., Hirano K., Koh T., Machino M., Ohno H., Yamamoto M., Sakagami H.. Anti-UV activity of lignin-carbohydrate complex and related
                        compounds. *In Vivo*. 2013;27:133-139. PMID: 23239862.
32. Nanbu T., Matsuta T., Sakagami H., Shimada J., Maki J., Makino T.. Anti-UV activity of Lentinus edodes mycelia extract (LEM). *In Vivo*. 2011;25:733-740. PMID: 21753126.
33. Sakagami H., Sheng H., Okudaira N., Yasui T., Wakabayashi H., Jia J., Natori T., Suguro-Kitajima M., Oizumi H., Oizumi T.. Prominent Anti-UV Activity and Possible Cosmetic Potential of
                        Lignin-carbohydrate Complex. *In Vivo*. 2016;30:331-339. PMID: 27381594.
34. Zhang Y., But P.P., Ooi V.E., Xu H.X., Delaney G.D., Lee S.H., Lee S.F.. Chemical properties, mode of action, and in vivo anti-herpes
                        activities of a lignin-carbohydrate complex from Prunella vulgaris. *Antivir. Res.*. 2007;75:242-249. DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2007.03.010. PMID: 17475343.
35. Lee J.B., Yamagishi C., Hayashi K., Hayashi T.. Antiviral and immunostimulating effects of
                        lignin-carbohydrate-protein complexes from Pimpinella anisum. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*. 2011;75:459-465. DOI: 10.1271/bbb.100645. PMID: 21389629.
36. Sakagami H.. Biological activities and possible dental application of three
                        major groups of polyphenols. *J. Pharmacol. Sci.*. 2014;126:92-106. DOI: 10.1254/jphs.14R04CR. PMID: 25263279.
37. Sakagami H., Kawano M., Thet M.M., Hashimoto K., Satoh K., Kanamoto T., Terakubo S., Nakashima H., Haishima Y., Maeda Y.. Anti-HIV and immunomodulation activities of cacao lass
                        lignin-carbohydrate complex. *In Vivo*. 2011;25:229-236. PMID: 21471539.
38. Thakkar J.N., Tiwari V., Desai U.R.. Nonsulfated, Cinnamic Acid-Based Lignins are Potent Antagonists
                        of HSV-1 Entry into Cells. *Biomacromolecules*. 2010;11:1412-1416. DOI: 10.1021/bm100161u. PMID: 20411926.
39. Loomis T.A., Beyer R.E.. Heparin-like anticoagulant action of sulfonated lignins from
                        commercial waste sulfite liquour. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.*. 1953;109:21-25. PMID: 13097330.
40. Monien B.H., Henry B.L., Raghuraman A., Hindle M., Desai U.R.. Novel chemo-enzymatic oligomers of cinnamic acids as direct and
                        indirect inhibitors of coagulation proteinases. *Bioorgan. Med. Chem.*. 2006;14:7988-7998. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2006.07.066. PMID: 16914317.
41. Henry B.L., Monien B.H., Bock P.E., Desai U.R.. A novel allosteric pathway of thrombin inhibition: Exosite II
                        mediated potent inhibition of thrombin by chemo-enzymatic, sulfated
                        dehydropolymers of 4-hydroxycinnamic acids. *J. Biolog. Chem.*. 2007;282:31891-31899. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M704257200. PMID: 17804413.
42. Henry B.L., Abdel Aziz M., Zhou Q., Desai U.R.. Sulfated, low-molecular-weight lignins are potent inhibitorsof
                        plasmin, in addition to thrombin and factor Xa: Novel opportunity for
                        controlling complex pathologies. *Thromb. Haemost.*. 2010;103:507-515. DOI: 10.1160/TH09-07-0454. PMID: 20024500.
43. Henry B.L., Desai U.R.. Sulfated Low Molecular Weight Lignins, Allosteric Inhibitors of
                        Coagulation Proteinases via the Heparin Binding Site, Significantly Alter
                        the Active Site of Thrombin and Factor Xa Compared to Heparin. *Thromb. Res.*. 2014;134:1123-1129. DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2014.08.024. PMID: 25242245.
44. Mehta A.Y., Mohammed B.M., Martin E.J., Brophy D.F., Gailani D., Desai U.R.. Allosterism-based Simultaneous, Dual Anticoagulant and
                        Antiplatelet Action. Allosteric Inhibitor Targeting the Glycoprotein
                        Ibα and Heparin-Binding Site of Thrombin. *J. Thromb. Haemost.*. 2016;14:828-838. DOI: 10.1111/jth.13254. PMID: 26748875.
45. Fischer B.M., Pavlisko E., Voynow J.A.. Pathogenic triad in COPD: Oxidative stress, proteaseantiprotease
                        imbalance, and inflammation. *Int. J. Chronic Obs. Pulm. Dis.*. 2011;6:413-421. DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S10770. PMID: 21857781.
46. Saluja B., Thakkar J.N., Li H., Desai U.R., Sakagami M.. Novel low molecular weight lignins as potential anti-emphysema
                        agents: In vitro triple inhibitory activity against elastase, oxidation and
                        inflammation. *Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther.*. 2013;26:296-304. DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.12.009. PMID: 23280431.
47. Pereira F.M., Gonçalves A.R., Ferraz A., Silva F.T., Oliveira S.C.. Estimation of solubility effect on the herbicide
                        controlled-release kinetics from lignin-based formulations. *Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.*. 2003;108:913-919. DOI: 10.1385/ABAB:108:1-3:913.
48. Fernández-Pérez M., Villafranca-Sánchez M., Flores-Céspedes F.. Controlled-release formulations of cyromazine-lignin matrix
                        coated with ethylcellulose. *J. Environ. Sci. Health B*. 2007;42:863-868. DOI: 10.1080/03601230701555153. PMID: 17763045.
49. Frangville C., Rutkevičius M., Richter A.P., Velev O.D., Stoyanov S.D., Paunov V.N.. Fabrication of environmentally biodegradable lignin nanoparticles. *ChemPhysChem*. 2012;13:4235-4243. DOI: 10.1002/cphc.201200537. PMID: 23047584.
50. Lievonen M., Valle-Delgado J.J., Mattinen M.L., Hult E.L., Lintinen K., Kostiainen M.A., Paananen A., Szilvay G.R., Setala H., Osterberg M.. A simple process for lignin nanoparticle preparation. *Green Chem.*. 2016;18:1416-1422. DOI: 10.1039/C5GC01436K.
51. Richter A.P., Bharti B., Armstrong H.B., Brown J.S., Plemmons D., Paunov V.N., Stoyanov S.D., Velev O.D.. Synthesis and characterization of biodegradable lignin
                        nanoparticles with tunable surface properties. *Langmuir*. 2016;32:6468-6477. DOI: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b01088. PMID: 27268077.
52. Figueiredo P., Lintinen K., Kiriazis A., Hynninen V., Liu Z., Ramos T., Rahikkala A., Correia A., Kohout T., Sarmento B.. In Vitro Evaluation of biodegradable lignin-based nanoparticles
                        for drug delivery and enhanced antiproliferation effect in cancer cells. *Biomaterials*. 2017;121:97-108. DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.12.034. PMID: 28081462.
53. Gutiérrez-Hernández J.M., Escalante A., Murillo-Vázquez R.N., Delgado E., González F.J., Toríz G.. Use of Agave tequilana-lignin and zinc oxide nanoparticles for
                        skin photoprotection. *J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol.*. 2016;163:156-161. DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2016.08.027. PMID: 27573548.
54. Klapiszewski L., Rzemieniecki T., Krawczyk M., Malina D., Norman M., Zdarta J., Majchrzak I., Dobrowolska A., Czaczyk K., Jesionowski T.. Kraft lignin/silica-AgNPs as a functional material with
                        antibacterial activity. *Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces*. 2015;134:220-228. DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2015.06.056. PMID: 26204502.
55. Nasti A., Zaki N.M., de Leonardis P., Ungphaiboon S., Sansongsak P., Rimoli M.G., Tirelli N.. Chitosan/TPP and chitosan/TPP-hyaluronic acid nanoparticles:
                        Systematic optimisation of the preparative process and preliminary
                        biological evaluation. *Pharm. Res.*. 2009;26:1918-1930. DOI: 10.1007/s11095-009-9908-0. PMID: 19507009.
56. Kim S., Fernandes M.M., Matamá T., Loureiro A., Gomes A.C., Cavaco-Paulo A.. Chitosan-lignosulfonates sono-chemically prepared nanoparticles:
                        Characterisation and potential applications. *Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces*. 2013;103:1-8. DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.10.033. PMID: 23178385.
57. Faustino H., Gil N., Baptista C., Duarte A.P.. Antioxidant Activity of Lignin Phenolic Compounds Extracted from
                        Kraft and Sulphite Black Liquors. *Molecules*. 2010;15:9308-9322. DOI: 10.3390/molecules15129308. PMID: 21169882.
58. Wahba S.M., Darwish A.S., Shehata I.H., Abd Elhalem S.S.. Sugarcane bagasse lignin, and silica gel and magneto-silica as
                        drug vehicles for development of innocuous methotrexate drug against
                        rheumatoid arthritis disease in albino rats. *Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl.*. 2015;48:599-610. DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2014.12.054. PMID: 25579963.
59. Răschip I.E., Panainte A.D., Pamfil D., Profire L., Vasile C.. In vitro testing of xanthan/lignin hydrogels as carriers for
                        controlled delivery of bisoprolol fumarare. *Rev. Med. Chir. Soc. Med. Nat. Iasi*. 2015;119:1189-1194. PMID: 26793868.
60. Chowdhury M.A.. The controlled release of bioactive compounds from lignin and
                        lignin-based biopolymer matrices. *Int. J. Biol. Macromol.*. 2014;65:136-147. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.01.012. PMID: 24418342.
61. Song Y., Hui J., Kou W., Xin R., Jia F., Wang N., Hu F., Zhang H., Liu H.. Identification of Inonotus obliquus and Analysis
                        of Antioxidation and Antitumor Activities of Polysaccharides. *Curr. Microbiol.*. 2008;57:454-462. DOI: 10.1007/s00284-008-9233-6. PMID: 18795365.
62. Wang Q., Mu H., Zhang L., Dong D., Zhang W., Duan J.. Characterization of two water-soluble lignin metabolites with
                        antiproliferative activities from Inonotus obliquus. *Int. J. Biol. Macromol.*. 2015;74:507-514. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.12.044. PMID: 25583019.
