# Long-term survival from gastrocolic fistula secondary to
                    adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon

**Authors:** Matthew J Forshaw, Jamasp K Dastur, Kothandaraman Murali, Michael C Parker

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 15705194
- Pmc: PMC549543
- Publisher-id: 1477-7819-3-9
- Doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-3-9

**Categories:**
- Case Report

**Publication Dates:**
- Collection: 2005
- Epub: 10-2-2005

## Abstract

### Background

Gastrocolic fistula is a rare presentation of both benign and malignant
                        diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. Malignant gastrocolic fistula is
                        most commonly associated with adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon in the
                        Western World. Despite radical approaches to treatment, long-term survival
                        is rarely documented.

### Case presentation

We report a case of a 24-year-old woman who presented with the classic triad
                        of symptoms associated with gastrocolic fistula. Radical en-bloc surgery
                        and adjuvant chemotherapy were performed. She is still alive ten years after
                        treatment.

### Conclusions

Gastrocolic fistula is an uncommon presentation of adenocarcinoma of the
                        transverse colon. Radical en-bloc surgery with adjuvant
                        chemotherapy may occasionally produce long-term survival.

## Background

Gastrocolic fistula is a rare complication of both benign and malignant diseases of
                the gastrointestinal tract [1-6]. In the Western World, adenocarcinoma of the
                transverse colon is the commonest cause of a fistulous connection between the
                stomach and the colon with a reported incidence of 0.3–0.4% in operated
                cases [3,4].
                Despite radical en-bloc surgery, these patients usually have a poor prognosis [5,6].
                Long-term survival for these patients is rarely reported [5].

The authors report a 24-year-old woman who presented with a gastrocolic fistula
                secondary to an adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon and describe her treatment
                and long-term follow up.

## Case presentation

A 24-year-old woman presented to the surgical clinic with epigastric pain, feculent
                vomiting and post-prandial diarrhoea of three months duration; she had lost over one
                stone in weight. She was previously healthy and was not taking any regular
                medications. There was no history of peptic ulcer disease, inflammatory bowel
                disease, trauma or previous abdominal surgery. She had been investigated two years
                previously by a gastroenterologist for intermittent left-sided abdominal pain at
                which time the clinical examination and blood tests were normal. Irritable bowel
                syndrome had been diagnosed, although no colonic imaging was performed. Both her
                maternal grandfather and great-grandfather had suffered from colonic cancer.

An initial ultrasound scan of the abdomen revealed thickened bowel in the right upper
                quadrant with a dilated duodenum. A barium meal and follow through was then
                performed: this demonstrated a mucosal abnormality on the greater curvature of the
                stomach with a fistulous tract into the transverse colon (Figure 1). Barium enema and colonoscopy were not
                performed. The presence of a mucosal abnormality on the greater curvature of the
                stomach was confirmed on upper gastrointestinal endoscopy although initial biopsies
                revealed no evidence of a malignant neoplasm. Her blood tests revealed: haemoglobin
                9.5 g/dl, mean cell volume 71.6 fl and a white cell count 20.2 × 109/l;
                urea, electrolytes and liver function tests were all normal.

In view of her symptoms, an exploratory laparotomy was undertaken. At surgery, a
                large mobile tumour of the distal transverse colon was identified; this was adherent
                to the greater curvature of the stomach, the mesentery and to several loops of
                jejunum. A radical en-bloc resection was performed involving a
                subtotal gastrectomy, transverse colectomy and small bowel resection (Figure 2). The patient made an uneventful recovery from
                surgery. Histology revealed a poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma of colon
                without lymphatic involvement (Dukes' Stage B): this was adherent to and had
                penetrated the stomach wall. She received adjuvant 5-fluorouracil (420 mg/m2)
                and folinic acid (20 mg/m2) chemotherapy every four weeks for the
                following six months.

She has been followed-up with two-yearly colonoscopy and five-yearly upper
                gastrointestinal endoscopy. She remains well with no signs of either local or
                distant recurrence more than ten years after initial diagnosis.

## Discussion

Advanced neoplasms of the stomach and transverse colon are the commonest causes of a
                gastrocolic fistula: adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon is commoner in the
                Western World [1,3,4], whereas
                adenocarcinoma of the stomach is a more frequent cause in Japan [5]. Gastrocolic fistula has also been reported
                with other tumour types such as gastric lymphoma [7],
                carcinoid tumours of the colon [8] and rarely,
                metastatic tumours [9] and infiltrating
                tumours of the pancreas, duodenum and biliary tract [
                3]. With advances in medical treatment, gastrocolic fistula secondary to
                peptic ulcer disease is now less common [6]. A
                variety of other causes of gastrocolic fistula have been reported: these include
                syphilis, tuberculosis, abdominal trauma, Crohn's disease, Cytomegalovirus gastric
                infection in AIDS patients and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes [10-13].

The fistulous connection in a gastrocolic fistula usually arises between the greater
                curvature of the stomach and the distal half of the transverse colon because of
                their close anatomical proximity separated only by the gastrocolic omentum [13]. Two theories have been advanced for the
                development of a fistula [1,3,4]: the
                tumour may invade directly across the gastrocolic omentum from the orginating organ;
                alternatively, a tumour ulcer may provoke a surrounding inflammatory peritoneal
                reaction leading to the adherence and fistulation between the two organs. Cases of
                malignant gastrocolic fistula have usually been characterised by the presence of
                large infiltrative tumours with a surrounding inflammatory reaction, as seen in our
                patient; lymph node involvement is unusual [13
                ].

Our patient presented with the characteristic triad of symptoms associated with a
                gastrocolic fistula [5,14]: diarrhoea, weight loss and faeculent vomiting. Other
                symptoms include: abdominal pain, fatigue, faeculent eructations and nutritional
                deficiencies. The gastrocolic fistula was identified in our patient by means of an
                upper gastrointestinal contrast series. Because the flow in the fistula is
                predominantly from transverse colon to stomach [15],
                several authors have suggested that barium enema is the more sensitive investigation
                in detecting and delineating such a fistula, although the detection rate may be
                lower in neoplastic cases [2,16-18].
                Computerised tomography may also be useful in both delineating the fistula and
                identifying the underlying aetiology [5,19]. Endoscopy is an excellent tool for
                visualising the fistulous opening (especially in the stomach) and also allows
                preoperative histological confirmation [20,21].

Although two stage approaches have been advocated historically for malignant
                gastrocolic fistula, in order to first correct nutritional deficiencies [22], most authors now prefer radical en-bloc
                resections [14]. Despite such approaches,
                most patients have a poor prognosis and no patient has survived for more than nine
                years after resection [5]. This case report
                describes the longest disease free survival of a patient with a malignant
                gastrocolic fistula. To the authors' knowledge, she is also the youngest patient to
                be reported. It is worth noting that colorectal cancer in patients aged less than 35
                years is normally associated with a poorer prognosis compared with older age groups
                [23-25].
                This is related to the biological characteristics of such tumours with a higher
                proportion of mucinous poorly differentiated tumours. As a result, younger patients
                present with more advanced disease. Such patients require early diagnosis and a
                radical approach to treatment.

## Conclusions

Gastrocolic fistula is an uncommon presentation of adenocarcinoma of the transverse
                colon. Radical en-bloc surgery with adjuvant chemotherapy may occasionally produce
                long-term survival.

## Competing interests

The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.

## Authors' contributions









All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## References

1. Schweitzer RJ, Osborne MP. Gastrocolic fistula complicating carcinoma; report of case due to
                        carcinoma of colon, with successful resection. *Am J Surg*. 1953;85:775-779. DOI: 10.1016/0002-9610(53)90567-4. PMID: 13058049.
2. Lahey FH, Swinton NW. Gastrojejunal ulcer and gastrojejunocolic fistula. *Surg Gynecol Obstet*. 1935;61:599-612.
3. Marshall SF, Knud-Hansen J. Gastrojejunocolic and gastrocolic fistulas. *Ann Surg*. 1957;145:770-782. PMID: 13425286.
4. Amlicke JA, Ponka JL. Gastrocolic and gastrojejunocolic fistulas. A report of sixteen
                        cases. *Am J Surg*. 1964;107:744-750. DOI: 10.1016/0002-9610(64)90304-6. PMID: 14166212.
5. Matsuo S, Eto T, Ohara O, Miyazaki J, Tsunoda T, Kanematsu T. Gastrocolic fistula originating from transverse colon cancer:
                        report of a case and review of the Japanese literature. *Surg Today*. 1994;24:1085-1089. PMID: 7780232.
6. Christiansen S, Sachatello C, Griffin WO. Management of gastrocolic fistula. *Am Surg*. 1981;47:63-66. PMID: 7469180.
7. Oh PI, Zalev AH, Colapinto ND, Deodhare SS, Brandwein J, Warren RE. Gastrocolic fistula secondary to primary gastric lymphoma. *J Clin Gastroenterol*. 1995;20:45-48. PMID: 7884178.
8. Lynch RC, Boese HL. Carcinoid tumor of transverse colon complicated by gastrocolic
                        fistula: survival following resection. *Surgery*. 1955;38:600-604. PMID: 13246952.
9. Chiang JM, Wang JY. Gastrocolic fistula due to a metastatic marginal ulcer from
                        carcinoma of the cervix. *Int J Gynaecol Obstet*. 1994;47:173-174. DOI: 10.1016/0020-7292(94)90362-X. PMID: 7843491.
10. Aqel NM, Tanner P, Drury A, Francis ND, Henry K. Cytomegalovirus gastritis with perforation and gastrocolic
                        fistula formation. *Histopathology*. 1991;18:165-168. PMID: 1849120.
11. Greenstein AJ. Surgery for Crohn's disease. *Surg Clin North Am*. 1987;67:573-596. PMID: 3495892.
12. Murphy S, Pulliam TJ, Lindsay J. Delayed gastrocolic fistula following endoscopic gastrotomy. *J Am Geriatr Soc*. 1991;39:532-537. PMID: 2022806.
13. Mallaiah L, Brozinsky S, Fruchter G, Siraj Uddin M. Malignant gastrocolic fistula case report and review of the
                        literature. *Am J Proctol Gastroenterol Colon Rectal Surg*. 1980;31:12-17. PMID: 7212049.
14. Singh V, Wadleigh R. Gastrocolic fistula as a complication of colonic carcinoma. *Acta Oncologica*. 1997;36:817-818. PMID: 9482688.
15. Mathewson C. Preliminary colostomy in the management of gastrocolic and
                        gastrojejunocolic fistula. *Ann Surg*. 1941;114:1004-1010. PMID: 17857925.
16. Skoog-Smith AW, Jaspin G, Sullivan JV. Gastrojejunocolic fistulas : postoperative complications in 19
                        cases. *Surg Gynecol Obstet*. 1950;91:447-454. PMID: 14782139.
17. Localio SA, Stone P, Hinton JW. Gastrojejunocolic fistula. *Surg Gynecol Obstet*. 1953;96:455-462. PMID: 13049075.
18. Lowdon AGR. Gastrojejunocolic fistula. *Br J Surg*. 1953;41:113-128. PMID: 13093981.
19. Lee WJ, Horton KM, Fishman EK. Gastrocolic fistula due to adenocarcinoma of the colon:
                        simulation of primary gastric leiomyosarcoma on CT. *Clin Imaging*. 1999;23:295-297. DOI: 10.1016/S0899-7071(99)00156-4. PMID: 10665346.
20. Choi SW, Yang JM, Kim SS, Kang SH, Ro HJ, Song KS, Ha HK, Lim KW, Kim JS. A case of combined gastrojejunal and gastrocolic fistula
                        secondary to gastric cancer. *J Korean Med Sci*. 1996;11:437-439. PMID: 8934400.
21. Mimidis K, Papadopoulos V, Katsinelos P, Deftereos S, Filippou D, Kartalis G. Gastrocolic fistula secondary to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
                        drugs abuse in a cirrhotic patient. *Rom J Gastroenterol*. 2004;13:39-41. PMID: 15054525.
22. Lorenzo GA, Beal JM. Gastrocolic fistula. *Am J Surg*. 1968;115:724-726. DOI: 10.1016/0002-9610(68)90111-6. PMID: 5645674.
23. Taylor MC, Pounder D, Ali-Ridha NH, Bodurtha A, MacMullin EC. Prognostic factors in colorectal carcinoma of young adults. *Can J Surg*. 1988;31:150-153. PMID: 3365608.
24. Cusack JC, Giacco GG, Cleary K, Davidson BS, Izzo F, Skibber J, Yen J, Curley SA. Survival factors in 186 patients younger than 40 years old with
                        colorectal adenocarcinoma. *J Am Coll Surg*. 1996;183:105-112. PMID: 8696540.
25. Adkins RB, DeLozier JB, McKnight WG, Waterhouse G. Carcinoma of the colon in patients 35 years of age and younger. *Am Surg*. 1987;53:141-145. PMID: 3826905.
