# Prevalence of Body Dysmorphic Disorder among patients seeking
                    orthodontic treatment

**Authors:** Haritha Pottipalli Sathyanarayana, Sridevi Padmanabhan, R. Balakrishnan, Arun B. Chitharanjan

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 32743673
- Pmc: PMC7396409
- Publisher-id: 322
- Doi: 10.1186/s40510-020-00322-8

**Categories:**
- Research

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 3-8-2020
- Pmc-release: 3-8-2020
- Collection: 2020

## Abstract

### Background

Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD) is a psychiatric disorder with
                        delusions about defects in appearance for which patients seek various
                        treatments. Patients with BDD often seek cosmetic procedures, and
                        orthodontic treatment is one among them. This is the first Indian study to
                        determine the prevalence of BDD in an orthodontic outpatient department.

### Materials and method

A total of 1184 patients with varying degrees of malocclusion
                        completed the BDD-YBOCS questionnaire, while an experienced orthodontist
                        assessed the severity of malocclusion with a rating scale.

### Results

Sixty-two patients (5.2%) were screened positive for BDD. Most of
                        the BDD-positive patients were single (p value of 0.02) and
                        had multiple previous consultations for orthodontic treatment (p
                        value of < 0.00**) with a gender predilection toward males (
                        p value of 0.00**), and age was not statistically significant with
                        a p value of 0.3.

### Conclusion

From our study, the prevalence of BDD among orthodontic patients
                        was 5.2%. The orthodontist should be aware of the high prevalence of BDD
                        among orthodontic patients and identify the expectations of the patient at
                        the time of history taking and refer the patient to a psychiatrist for
                        diagnosis and appropriate management.

## Introduction

There has been an increase in the number of patients who seek orthodontic
                treatment to improve their appearance and quality of life because of the varied
                treatment options available. Body image plays an important role for patients
                requesting orthodontic treatment. Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD) previously known as
                dysmorphophobia is also referred to as body dysmorphia or dysmorphic syndrome. BDD
                was first described by Morselli as dysmorphophobia. In 1987, the American
                Psychiatric Association recognized this disorder as “Body Dysmorphic
                Disorder” in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV
                (DSM IV) [1] and the International
                Classification of Diseases-10 [2] which is
                described as a mental condition characterized as a distressing or impairing
                preoccupation with an imagined or a slight defect in appearance.

According to DSM-5, BDD is now classified under Obsessive-Compulsive and
                related disorders requiring the presence of repetitive behaviors or mental acts in
                response to appearance concerns [3]. BDD was
                earlier considered as a somatoform disorder in which the affected person was
                excessively concerned about and preoccupied by a perceived defect in his or her
                physical features (body image). BDD is currently described as an
                Obsessive-Compulsive-related disorder since there is a pathological fear of ugliness
                in some parts of the body although no defect is observed by others or, if any, is
                thought to be slight [4].

The head and face seem to be the most concerned part of the body among BDD
                patients which includes acne, wrinkles, scars, vascular markings, swelling, facial
                asymmetry or disproportion, hair thinning, or excessive facial hair [5, 6].
                Apart from the above mentioned concerns, BDD patients are also concerned
                about the nose, eyes, eyelids, eyebrows, ears, cheeks, teeth, lips, mouth, and jaws.
                Teeth whitening, jaw surgery, and braces were the major concerns for BDD patients to
                visit the general dentists. Orthodontic concerns were rotations, spacing, upper and
                lower midlines, and tooth size [7].

In patients who seek cosmetic therapy, BDD can be more prevalent and may
                remain unrecognized. Most of the BDD patients who undergo regular dental or
                orthodontic treatment are not satisfied with the results and seek other dentists and
                orthodontists for the same concern repeatedly. The psychological assessment and
                expectations of patients seeking orthodontic treatment is an important and therefore
                critical part of the overall assessment. It allows us to understand the potential
                problems at an initial stage before commencing the treatment.

BDD is reported in 2% of the general population and between 6 and 15% of
                dermatologic and cosmetic surgery patients in the USA [8]. Only two studies have been published on the prevalence of
                BDD among orthodontic patients. Hepburn and Cunningham conducted a study on 40 adult
                orthodontic patients and found that 7.5% of orthodontic patients were screened
                positive for BDD compared to 2.9% in a general public sample [9]. The second study by Yassaei et al. evaluated 270 Iranian
                orthodontic patients and reported that fifteen patients (5.5%) screened positive for
                BDD [10]. The prevalence of BDD in the
                dermatological setting was 8–15% [11
                , 12], and plastic surgery patients were
                3–53% [13, 14]. As orthodontists are likely to encounter such patients in
                their practice, it is mandatory to understand and be familiar with BDD so that these
                patients could be referred to a psychiatrist for diagnosis and appropriate
                management.

Leone et al. [15] reported the
                diagnostic criteria as follows: (1) Preoccupation with an imagined defect in
                appearance. If a slight physical anomaly is present, the person’s concern is
                excessive. (2) The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or
                impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. (3) The
                preoccupation is not better accounted for by another mental disorder. BDD is also
                associated with significant occupational and social impairment and suicidal
                tendencies [16]. BDD is a poorly studied
                condition among Asian populations, and to our knowledge, no data exist about the
                prevalence of BDD among Indian orthodontic patients.

## Aim

The following are the aims of the present study:\n
                        
                            To screen and identify the patients who are seeking
                    orthodontic treatment for BDD
                        
                        
                            To establish an association between demographic variables
                    and BDD in the study population

## Materials and method

This study was conducted in the Department of Orthodontics, Sri
                Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, India. The study
                protocol was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC-NI/12/MAR/27/15).
                The sample size with the power of 80 was calculated, and 1184 patients who had been
                referred to the Department of Orthodontics seeking orthodontic treatment
                participated in the study. The inclusion criteria were that the patient had to be
                over 18 years of age and willing to participate in the study and fill out
                the questionnaire. Patients with physical deformities, craniofacial syndromes, cleft
                lip and/or palate, and skeletal malocclusion requiring orthognathic surgery were
                excluded from the study. All the subjects were informed in detail about the
                questionnaire and had consented to participate in the study. All new patients who
                met the inclusion criteria received a self-report version of the BDD-YBOCS
                questionnaire which has reliable validity and reproducibility [17]. A modified self-report version of the BDD-YBOCS
                questionnaire has 12 questions of which the first three were related to the
                diagnostic criteria of BDD and the rest of the questions were focused on determining
                the severity of symptoms [18]. Diagnosis is
                based on the score of a patient in the first three questions. A score of 3 is
                suggestive of no BDD, while scores of 4–5 indicate mild BDD, 6–7
                represent moderate BDD, and 8–9 and 10–11 pertain to severe and
                extremely severe BDD, respectively [19].
                Age, gender, and marital status were added to the questionnaire. In addition, one
                question regarding the history of previous orthodontic consultations from the
                screening questionnaire for BDD in orthodontic patients suggested by Polo was
                included in our questionnaire [7]. Once the
                questionnaire was filled, an experienced orthodontist rated the severity of
                malocclusion in all the patients. The scale ranges from 1 to 4, where grade 1 is
                very extremely minor malocclusion; grade 2 is described as mild tooth rotations,
                mild inter-dental spacing, minimal misalignment of the midline, and other minor
                tooth imperfections; grade 3 is moderate or borderline need; and grade 4 definitely
                requires treatment.

The rating accuracy of the orthodontist was assessed using 25 photographs
                of patients with varying degrees of malocclusion, and the assessment was repeated
                after a 2-week interval which showed an intra-class correlation coefficient of 0.7.

## Statistical analyses

The data was analyzed using the Statistical Package for Social
                    Sciences (SPSS) version 18 for Windows (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The
                    BDD-YBOCS questionnaire was used, and the patients were determined BDD-positive
                    or BDD-negative. The mean age between BDD-positive and BDD-negative patients was
                    compared using Student’s t test while the Chi-square
                    test was used for the nominal variables such as the gender, marital status, and
                    history of previous orthodontic consultations. The statistical significance was
                    considered to be p ≤ 0.05.

## Results

From the 1184 patients, 62 patients (5.2%) of which 49 men and 13 women
                were diagnosed with BDD. Five were severely affected (BDD-YBOCS score 8–9),
                19 were moderate (BDD-YBOCS score 6–7), and 38 were mild (BDD-YBOCS score
                4–5) and is described in Table 1.\n

Comparisons between BDD-positive and BDD-negative patients which is
                described in Table 2 showed that BDD
                patients in our sample were younger with a mean age of 20.4 years than
                non-BDD patients with a mean age of 24.3 years but was not statistically
                significant (p = 0.3); among the 62 patients with BDD, 49 of them
                were males and 13 were females (p = 0.0003). Considering the
                marital status, 46 patients were single and 16 were married (p =
                0.02). Most of the 44 BDD patients had sought previous orthodontic consultations
                before, and 18 patients reported for their first consultation (p =
                0.000).\n

Characteristics of the malocclusion in BDD-positive patients are described
                in Table 3. Of the 62 BDD-positive
                patients, 29 patients (47%) had minor tooth rotations, 17 patients (27%) had very
                mild spacing, nine patients (15%) had mild midline discrepancy, two patients (3%)
                had minimal tooth size imperfections, and five patients (8%) had other minimal tooth
                irregularities.\n

## Discussion

This is the first Indian study to assess the prevalence of BDD among
                patients seeking orthodontic treatment. In our study, 62 patients (5.2%) among 1184
                patients were screened positive for BDD. Among the patients who screened positive
                for BDD, the focus of concerns in 38 patients was on the teeth and 19 patients on
                the teeth and hair, and the preoccupations in the other five patients included
                teeth, lips, nose, and pigmentation on the face. In our study, BDD-positive patients
                were concerned about very mild rotations, spacing, midline discrepancy, and tooth
                size discrepancies which did not require orthodontic treatment. The age group of our
                patients included in the study was over 18 years since symptoms of BDD
                usually begin during adolescence [20]. In
                our study, BDD patients were younger than non-BDD patients, but it was not
                statistically significant. This finding was in contrary to the findings of Uzun et
                al. [21] but similar to the findings of
                Yassaei et al. [10], Vulink et al. [22], and Philips et al. [23] in which BDD was more prevalent in the younger age group.

A gender preference toward males was seen in our study which also accords
                with some earlier findings [22] and is in
                contrast with others [10, 23]. Philips et al. concluded that there was a
                gender ratio of 1.27 for women to men in the community and 1.64 among students
                whereas there was an equal gender distribution in psychiatric service. According to
                the American Society of Plastic Surgeons in 2014, the gender ratio is reversed in
                general cosmetic surgery and in rhinoplasty settings with more prevalence among men.
                Considering the above statistics, our study showed more prevalence among men [24, 25
                ].

In our study, the majority of the BDD patients were single which
                correlates with the findings of Hepburn and Cunningham [9]. One question suggested by Polo was added which was not the
                repetition of BDD-YBOCS questions and had the following answer: yes or no [7]. Our BDD patients had multiple previous
                orthodontic consultations which were in accordance with the study of Yassaei et al.
                [10]. Hepburn and Cunningham conducted an
                interview-based study and concluded that BDD was diagnosed in 2 patients (2.86%)
                among 70 members of the general public and 3 patients (7.5%) among 40 adult
                orthodontic patients [9]. Vulink et al.
                concluded that the prevalence of BDD in a maxillofacial outpatient setup presenting
                for orthognathic surgery for a period of 6 months was 17% [23]. The prevalence of BDD among Indian
                orthodontic patients seems to be less than other populations. Differences in the
                ethnicity of study population, inclusion and exclusion criteria, self-report
                questionnaire, or an interview with a psychiatrist could play an important role in
                varied results. A questionnaire is one of the most convenient and proven ways to
                screen and identify patients who may suffer from BDD. In order to correctly diagnose
                BDD, a series of questions are asked to the patient to determine if they are
                consumed with distress about a seemingly small or unnoticeable flaw. In accordance
                with previous studies, the head and face seem to be the common areas of concern
                among BDD patients [5, 6]. However, all patients were assessed by a senior
                orthodontist as having mild malocclusions, which was more likely to be accepted by
                most people, or no obvious malocclusion was present.

BDD affects the quality of life and is associated with depression and
                Obsessive-Compulsive disorder. It is important to understand the expectations and
                also to know whether a patient has previously received the treatment. It is
                essential to elicit the age at which the concerns started and its impact on their
                lives. During history taking and clinical examination, additional time should be
                spent on each patient assessing their need for treatment, and questions to identify
                patients with BDD should also be included. The questionnaire can serve as a tool in
                screening patients who might be a suspect of BDD. Orthodontists should refer the
                patients who are suspicious with a slight defect insisting on treatment or an
                imagined defect to a psychiatrist before initiating orthodontic treatment. A
                psychiatrist plays an important role in helping us to identify these patients as
                well as treating them with pharmacotherapy and behavioral therapy.

## Conclusion

The following conclusions were drawn from our study:\n
                    
                        This study suggests that BDD occurs in adult orthodontic
                patients, and its prevalence was 5.2% in our sample of 1184 patients. The teeth and
                face seem to be the most common areas of concern.
                    
                    
                        BDD-positive patients in our study population were mostly
                males, single, younger, and had previous orthodontic consultations than BDD-negative
                patients.
                    
                    
                        Orthodontists should be aware of its features and include a
                few questions during history taking to help identify potentially high-risk patients.

## Supplementary information

\n
                        
                            
                                Additional file 1. Questionnaire.
                            
                        
                    
                    \n

**Keywords:**
Body Dysmorphic Disorder, Prevalence, Screening, Orthodontics

**Copyright:** © The Author(s) 2020

## References

1. . . *Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Fourth Edition
                        Text Revision*. 2000;:507-510. DOI: 
2. . . *The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders*. 1992;:-. DOI: 
3. . . *Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders*. 2013;:-. DOI: 
4. Ahluwalia R, Bhatia NK, Kumar PS, Kaur P. Body dysmorphic disorder: diagnosis, clinical aspects and
                        treatment strategies. *Indian J Dent Res*. 2017;28:193-197. DOI: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_669_15
5. . . *Diagnostic and statistical management of mental disorders*. 1994;:464-469. DOI: 
6. Phillips KA, Dufresne RG. Body dysmorphic disorder. A guide for dermatologists and cosmetic
                        surgeons. *Am J Clin Dermatol*. 2000;1:235-243. DOI: 10.2165/00128071-200001040-00005
7. Polo M. Body dysmorphic disorder: a screening guide for orthodontists. *Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop*. 2011;139:170-173. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajodo.2010.09.025
8. Wilson JB, Arpey CJ. Body dysmorphic disorder: suggestions for detection and treatment
                        in a surgical dermatology practice. *Dermatol Surg*. 2004;30:1391-1399. DOI: 
9. Hepburn S, Cunningham S. Body dysmorphic disorder in adult orthodontic patients. *Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop*. 2006;130:569-574. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajodo.2005.06.022
10. Yassaei S, Goldani Moghadam M, Aghili H, Tabatabaei SM. Body dysmorphic disorder in Iranian orthodontic patients. *Acta Med Iran*. 2014;52:454-457. DOI: 
11. Dufresne RG, Phillips KA, Vittorio CC, Wilkel CS. A screening questionnaire for body dysmorphic disorder in a
                        cosmetic dermatologic surgery practice. *Dermatol Surg*. 2001;27:457-462. DOI: 
12. Phillips KA, Dufresne RG, Wilkel CS, Vittorio CC. Rate of body dysmorphic disorder in dermatology patients. *J Am Acad Dermatol*. 2000;42:436-441. DOI: 10.1016/S0190-9622(00)90215-9
13. Aouizerate B, Pujol H, Grabot D, Faytout M, Suire K, Braud C. Body dysmorphic disorder in a sample of cosmetic surgery
                        applicants. *Eur Psychiatry*. 2003;18:365-368. DOI: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2003.02.001
14. Vindigni V. The importance of recognizing body dysmorphic disorder in
                        cosmetic surgery patients: do our patients need a preoperative psychiatric
                        evaluation?. *Eur J Plast Surg*. 2002;25:305-308. DOI: 10.1007/s00238-002-0408-2
15. Leone JE, Sedory EJ, Gray KA. Recognition and treatment of muscle dysmorphia and related body
                        image disorders. *J Athl Train*. 2005;40:352-359. DOI: 
16. Phillips KA. Body dysmorphic disorder and depression: theoretical
                        considerations and treatment strategies. *Psychiatr Q*. 1999;70:313-331. DOI: 10.1023/A:1022090200057
17. Phillips KA, Hollander E, Rasmussen SA. A severity rating scale for body dysmorphic disorder:
                        development, reliability, and validity of a modified version of the
                        Yale-Brown obsessive compulsive scale. *Psychopharmacol Bull*. 1997;33:17-22. DOI: 
18. . . *Understanding body dysmorphic disorder; an essential guide*. 2009;:-. DOI: 
19. Philips KA. . *The broken mirror: understanding and treating BDD*. 1996;:-. DOI: 
20. Phillips KA. Body dysmorphic disorder: clinical aspects and treatment
                        strategies. *Bull Menninger Clin*. 1998;62:A33-A48. DOI: 
21. Uzun O, Basoglu C, Akar A. Body dysmorphic disorder in patients with acne. *Compr Psychiatry*. 2003;44:415-419. DOI: 10.1016/S0010-440X(03)00102-0
22. Vulink NCC, Rosenberg A, Plooij JM, Koole R, Bergé SJ, Denys D. Body dysmorphic disorder screening in maxillofacial outpatients
                        presenting for orthognathic surgery. *Int. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg.*. 2008;37:985-991. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijom.2008.06.005
23. Phillips KA, Menard W, Fay C. Demographic characteristics phenomenology, comorbidity, and
                        family history in 200 individuals with body dysmorphic disorder. *Psychosomatics*. 2005;46:317-325. DOI: 10.1176/appi.psy.46.4.317
24. Phillips KA, Didie ER, Menard W, Pagano ME, Fay C, Weisberg RB. Clinical features of body dysmorphic disorder in adolescents and
                        adults. *Psychiatry Research*. 2006;141:305-314. DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2005.09.014
25. . . *Plastic surgery statistics report. ASPS National Clearinghouse of
                        Plastic Surgery Procedural Statistics*. 2014;:-. DOI: 
