# Dental Caries Status and its Related Factors in Iran: A Meta-Analysis

**Authors:** Mohammad Reza Soltani, Mahsa Sayadizadeh, Sajad Raeisi Estabragh, Kiana Ghannadan, Mahsa Malek-Mohammadi

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 33062809
- Pmc: PMC7519938
- Publisher-id: JDS-21-3
- Doi: 10.30476/DENTJODS.2020.82596.1024

**Categories:**
- Systematic Review

**Publication Dates:**
- Ppub: 9-2020

## Abstract

### Statement of the Problem:

Dental caries is a global health issue, which imposes a great deal on
                        individuals and the community.

### Purpose:

The main purpose of this study was to identify the dental caries status
                        and/or DMFT/dmft data and its related factors in Iran.

### Materials and Method:

The search performed in the online databases to identify all literature
                        published up to Oct 2018. The random effects model was applied to
                        pool\nanalysis and verses. Funnel plots and Egger test used to examine
                        publication bias. All analyses were carried out with R software version
                        3.2.1 and STATA (version 11.1).

### Results:

69 studies selected as eligible for final analysis in which all subjects
                        were in age range less than 18 years old except 4; so, all results\nand
                        analyzes were only calculated in this age group. The total rate of dental
                        caries was 72.8% (95%CI, 69.2-76.4%) and the mean of dental caries was\n2.33
                        (95% CI, 2.12–2.54) based on DMFT values and 3.86 (95% CI,
                        3.49–4.22) based on the dmft values. These rates were almost similar
                        in both sexes. In addition,\nthese trend were higher in rural than urban
                        regions. Subgroup analysis found a direct relationship between DMFT index
                        and age, while the reverse was true for relationship\nbetween dmft and age.
                        The mean dental caries were higher in children with low socioeconomic
                        status, low family income, low educated and unemployed parents, crowded
                        families,\nexcessive carbohydrate intake, and less toothbrushes frequency.

### Conclusion:

The present study showed high prevalence and experience of dental caries
                        among children and adolescents (<18 years of age) in Iran.\nThis
                        illustrates ineffective oral health national preventive programs and lack of
                        educational measures. New preventive procedures, practical educational
                        programs,\nand modern therapeutic methods are needed to improve oral health
                        status.

## Introduction

Dental caries, also known as tooth decay, is a dynamic biological process of
                irreversible destruction of susceptible dental hard tissues because of acids
                produced by bacterial\nglycolysis of dietary carbohydrates [ 1\n]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO)
                report, approximately 60% to 90% of school-aged children and nearly all adults have
                dental caries at some point in their life span \n[ 
                2\n]. Several etiological factors include fermentable carbohydrates,
                qualitative bacterial components, oral colonization by cariogenic bacteria, a
                susceptible tooth (host), \namount and components of saliva, poor oral hygiene, and
                time are contributed in the onset and progression of dental caries [ 3\n, 4\n].
                Usually, dental caries in epidemiologic surveys evaluated according to the WHO
                criteria using dmft (the decayed, missing, filled teeth for primary teeth) and DMFT
                \n(the decayed, missing, filled teeth for permanent teeth) indices, which measure
                caries at cavitation level [ 5\n, 6\n]. Dental caries can cause pain,
                inflammation and gingival bleeding, abscess formation, tooth loss, and subsequently
                loss of available space in the arch\n[ 7\n].
                It is also expensive to treat and may cause oral malodor, leads to lost
                productivity, causes harm to nutrition and affects overall health and quality of
                life \n[ 8\n]. Furthermore, it is linked to
                some systemic diseases such as cardiac problems, stroke, and respiratory disease
                since it may cause chronic infections in the body \n[ 9\n]. Several studies have shown that dental caries
                affects all ages, races, and socioeconomic groups and reported the correlation
                between children's dental caries with\nsome demographic and socioeconomic factors
                including age, sex, level of parents’ education, the family income, and
                socioeconomic backgrounds [ 10\n, 11\n]. Despite the application of multiple
                health programs to improve oral health, dental caries is still considered as a
                global health concern; therefore, it is necessary\nto assess the strategies for
                primary prevention of this disease and to implement health promotion programs. The
                measurement of oral health status and conducting accurate\nand up-to-date research
                is important for understanding natural history and biological processes of a disease
                for projecting and assessing health services. There are a number \nof studies with
                various populations done in Iran regarding the prevalence of dental caries or
                DMFT/dmft data; therefore, an overall estimation of the prevalence is needed to
                \nhelp understanding the status of caries by synthesizing available studies in our
                country more clearly. In addition, the format of a systematic review is very
                effective in collecting \na large amount of data, understanding the breadth and
                quality of conducted studies, and analyzing simultaneously. With this background,
                performing a systematic review and meta-analysis\nseems to be necessary. To the best
                of our knowledge from indexed literature, a meta-analysis of dental caries
                prevalence, experience, or incidence in Iran has yet to be reported. Therefore,\nthe
                main purpose of this study was to identify the dental caries status and/or DMFT/
                dmft data in Iran. We also considered the effect of demographic and socioeconomic
                factors on oral health.

## Materials and Method

## Search methods for identification of studies

Electronic searches were carried out for related Persian and English articles (up
                    to October 2018) with existent documents in national and international online
                    databases.\nSearching was done using keywords and search terms including
                    «dental caries», «dental decays »,
                    «dental missing», «dental filling»,
                    «DMFT», «dmft», «dft»,
                    «dmfs», «dfs»,
                    «Iran»,\n«Iranians» and «Persia»
                    through international databases: PubMed, the Scopus databases, ScienceDirect,
                    and Google Scholar. The national databases (SID, Noormag, Magiran,
                    Iranmedex,\nand Irandoc) were also searched using all probable combinations of
                    the Persian equivalents of identified keywords. We completed our electronic
                    search with hand searches of reference\nlists of all primary studies and review
                    articles to identify any studies that could have remained unidentified in the
                    previous step. Only published and accessible papers were considered.

## Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Records of all references obtained through the search strategy were combined in
                    the reference management software, EndNote X4 (Thomas Reuters, Philadelphia, PA,
                    USA),\nand duplicate items were deleted using the features of this software. All
                    types of studies, including observational longitudinal, cross-sectional, cohort
                    and case-control\nstudies reporting dental caries prevalence, experience, or
                    incidence in Iran were reviewed. The inclusion criteria were: original studies,
                    studies including caries prevalence\nand/or DMFT/dmft data; studies conducting
                    in healthy participants who had not previous history of systemic disease and
                    were not being under orthodontic treatment; studies measuring\nuntreated caries
                    and/or DMFT/dmft data through clinical examination by appropriately qualified
                    practitioner/researchers or through health records databases were
                    included.\nOnly studies fulfilling all of these criteria and published in full
                    text were included in the qualitative and quantitative synthesis. In cases of
                    multiple publications from\nthe same population or cohort, only the largest
                    study was included. Studies that were meta-analyses or systematic
                    considerations, and those that presented insufficient data were excluded.

## Data Extraction

The data and information were extracted from eligible articles based on a
                    standard protocol. Study characteristics (the name of first author, publication
                    year, the year and place of the study),\ndemographic features (sample size, age
                    group); the dental variables, socioeconomic parameter, and study type were
                    extracted from each trial. Reported estimates for dental\ncaries were the
                    prevalence/incidence of untreated caries (DMFT/dmft being >0), the
                    prevalence of caries experience (percentage of a population with any caries
                    experience),\nthe caries experience (average DMFT/dmft indexes). Literature
                    review identified key confounders that affect the caries incidence; these items
                    included age, sex, socio-economic status,\nparent’s educational level,
                    parent’s occupation, the number of children in family, dental visits,
                    and so on. To explore the effects of these factors on the caries incidence,\nwe
                    extracted the reported DMFT/dmft values between the lowest and the highest
                    reported confounder factors and assessed the differences between them. Next,
                    data extraction forms\nwere designed, filled out, and imported into Microsoft
                    Excel. The articles’ authors were contacted for supplementary data or
                    further elucidation, if data were missing or for clarifications.

## Quality assessment of the selected studies

The quality assessment of the included studies was evaluated using the
                    Newcastle–Ottawa Scale (NOS) checklist; NOS assess the domains of
                    selection bias,\ncomparability of groups and attrition bias, and ascertainment
                    of exposure and outcomes [ 12\n]. Study
                    quality was graded on a scoring system. The NOS ranges from zero to nine stars;
                    studies with NOS scores of less than 3, from 4 to 6, and more than 7 \nwere
                    considered as having low, moderate, and high methodological quality,
                    respectively. Two reviewers independently performed search process, selection of
                    studies,\ndata extraction, and quality assessment and their findings and results
                    were compared later. Disagreements were resolved by group discussion.

## Data Synthesis and Analysis

One of the main objectives of this study was to evaluate the prevalence/incidence
                    of caries; therefore, the overall prevalence of dental caries and
                    reported\nDMFT/dmft values in different studies were extracted to enable
                    quantitative synthesis and analysis. The binomial distribution used to calculate
                    the variance in\neach study and the weighted mean was used for a combination of
                    prevalence rate in different studies. Each study was given a weight equal to its
                    inverse variance.

To explore the effects of confounder factors on the caries incidence, only
                    studies reporting of DMFT/dmft mean were used for quantitative data
                    synthesis.\nThe rates and mean values with a confidence interval of 95% were
                    computed as the effect measure for both individual trials and pooled estimates.
                    Statistical\nheterogeneity was evaluated in studies using chi-squared test and I
                    2 index. In this meta-analysis, due to the significant heterogeneity of
                    the studies,\nthe random effects model was applied to pool analysis and verses.
                    We undertook subgroup analyses based on sex, age, and region to explore the
                    reasons for heterogeneity.\nIntegrated estimations and the related confidence
                    interval of 95%were evaluated using forest plots as visuals. Funnel plots and
                    Egger test were used to check the possibility\nof publication bias. Sensitivity
                    analyses were performed to control for the effects of imputing data and to
                    assess the effects of possible publication or reporting bias.\nSignificance was
                    set at p< 0.05 as valid for heterogeneity tests. All
                    analyses were carried out with comprehensive meta-analysis R software version
                    3.2.1 and STATA (version 11.1).

## Results

**Table 1**

*Characteristics and information of studies evaluated in this
                            meta-analysis.*

| Authors
                                    (Reference) | Publication
                                    year | City | Sample size | Dependent
                                    Variable (mean±SD) | Dependent
                                    Variable (mean±SD) |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Bashirian [13] | 2018 | Hamedan | T:988 | DMFT: | Dmft: | 9 |
| B:503 | T:
                                    0.79±1.53 | T:
                                    3.61±3.58 |
| G:485 | B:
                                    0.63±1.17 | B:
                                    4.04±3.78 |
| G:
                                    0.96±1.49 | G:
                                    3.16±3.31 |
| DT:
                                    0.33±0.85 | dt:
                                    2.68±3.05 |
| MT:
                                    0.009±0.13 | mt:
                                    0.60±1.12 |
| FT:
                                    0.44±1.04 | ft :
                                    0.32±0.93 |
| Shaghaghian [14] | 2018 | Shiraz | T:396 | Dmft | Dental caries: 69.9% CF:
                                    30.1% | 8 |
| B:202 | T:
                                    3.88±3.9 |
| G:194 | B:
                                    3.95±4.05 |
| G:
                                    3.82±3.75 |
| Esmaeilzadeh [15] | 2017 | Jolfa, East Azerbaijan | T:146 | DMFT: | Dental caries: 92.5% | 4 |
| B:80 | T:
                                    4.3±2.93 |
| G:46 | B:
                                    4.38±2.26 |
| G:
                                    4.21±3.60 |
| D: 5.37±3.55 |
| Usefi [16] | 2017 | Bovair Ahmad | T:460 | DMFT: | Dmft: | 8 |
| B:244 | T:
                                    0.86±1.31 | T:
                                    3.57±3.12 |
| G:216 | B:
                                    0.76±1.19 | B:
                                    3.69±3.25 |
| G:
                                    1.0±1.42 | G: 3.43±2.98 |
| Dental caries: 89.8% |
| Jafari [17] | 2017 | Hashtrood, Tabriz | 335 | DMFT:
                                    2.09±2.2 | Dmft:
                                    4.08±3.51 | 7 |
| DT:
                                    3.34±1.54 | dt:
                                    4.77±2.42 |
| MT:
                                    1.67±1.19 | mt:
                                    1.95±1.28 |
| FT: 1.46±0.66 | ft : 2.0±1.27 |
| Mehralian [18] | 2017 | Qazvin | T:373 | DMFT:
                                    3.53±4.22 | Dmft:
                                    5.66±4.63 | 6 |
| B:206 | DT:
                                    3.1±3.57 | dt:
                                    4.98±4.32 |
| G:167 | MT:
                                    0.12±0.43 | mt:
                                    0.11±0.38 |
| FT: 0.3±0.81 | ft : 0.13±0.57 |
| Amiri [19] | 2017 | Ahvaz | T:359 | dmft: | Dental caries: 87.7% | 4 |
| B:161 | T:
                                    2.62±2.15 |
| G:198 | B:
                                    2.87±2.33 |
| G:
                                    2.41±1.97 |
| CF: 12.3% |
| Sistani [20] | 2017 | Babol | T:2080 | dmft: | G:
                                    4.05±4.02 | 4 |
| B:1111 | T:
                                    4.01±3.89 | CF:26.3% |
| G:969 | B:
                                    3.98±3.79 | Dental caries:
                                    73.7% |
| KhaniVarzegani [21] | 2017 | Tabriz | T:756 | dmft | CF; | 7 |
| B:389 | T: 4 (2-8) | T:15.2% |
| G:367 | B: 4 (2-9) | M: 17.2% |
| G: 5 (2-8) | F: 13.1% |
| Khodadadi [22] | 2016 | Babol | T:384 | dmft: | dt=6.5±4.35 | 5 |
| B:204 | T:
                                    8.2±7.65 | mt=
                                    0.4±1.1 |
| G:180 | B:
                                    8.5±7.79 | ft=1.2±2.2 |
| G: 7.6±7.4 |
| Mahmoudi [23] | 2016 | Fasa | T:4405\nB:2031\nG:2347\n | DMFT:\nT:
                                    1.26±1.64\nB: 1.23±1.74\nG:
                                    1.29±1.55\nDT: 1.0±1.46\nMT:
                                    0.12±0.48\nFT: 0.15±0.63\n | Dmft:\nT:
                                    4.45±3.43\nB: 4.51±3.41\nG:
                                    4.40±3.44\ndt: 3.32±3.00\nmt:
                                    0.97±1.43\nft : 0.16±0.70\nSiC:
                                    10.18±2.23\nCF: 6.8%\n | 8 |
| Marasouli [24] | 2016 | Urmia | T:93/
                                    B:70/G:23 | DMFT: 2.55 | Dmft: 2.5 | 3 |
| Eskandarizadeh
                                    [25] | 2016 | Kerman | T:300\nB:150\nG:150\n | Dmft\nT:
                                    4.63±2.41\nB: 5.07±2.38\n | G:
                                    4.2±2.4\nSiC: 7.34±1.34\n | 6 |
| Golkari [26] | 2016 | Shiraz | T:335\nB:158\nG:177\n | DMFT:
                                    1.22±1.5\nG:1.00\nB: 1.3\nDmft: 2.8±2.5\n | Dental caries:
                                    75.5% in primary dentition and 47.5% in permanent dentition | 7 |
| Rahimian
                                    Emam [27] | 2015 | Zahedan | 100 | DMFT:
                                    2.29±1.67 |  | 5 |
| Asdagh [28] | 2015 | Ardabil | T:847\nB:403\nG:444\n | DMFT:
                                    1.6±0.1\ndmft: 2.74±0.09\nDMFS:
                                    3.5±0.1\n | Dental caries:
                                    79.7% (88.3% in primary dentition and 71.1% in permanent
                                    dentition) | 7 |
| Alimorad [29] | 2015 | Bandar
                                    Abbas | T:768\nB:384\nG:384\n | DMFT:\nT:1.8±1.87\nB:
                                    1.98±1.84\nG: 1.61±1.89\nDT: 1.74±1.83\n | MT:
                                    0±0.05\nFT: 0.32±1.80\nDental caries:
                                    T:65.2%\nB: 71.4%, G:59.1% (permanent dentition), CF:34.8%\n | 7 |
|  | 2015 | Bandar
                                    Abbas | T:768\nB:384\nG:384\n | DMFT:\nT:1.8±1.87\nB:
                                    1.98±1.84\nG: 1.61±1.89\nDT: 1.74±1.83\n | MT:
                                    0±0.05\nFT: 0.32±1.80\nDental caries:
                                    T:65.2%\nB: 71.4%\nG:59.1% (permanent dentition)\nCF:34.8%\n | 7 |
| Banihashemi-Rad
                                    [30] | 2015 | Mashhad | T:552\nB:161\nG:391\n | DMFT:
                                    B:1.25±1.22\nG:
                                    1.3±1.3\ndmft:\nB:3.43±2.43\nG:
                                    3.28±2.56\nCF: 4.1%\n | Dental caries:
                                    95.5% (85% in primary dentition and 60% in permanent dentition) | 7 |
| Bahrolooloomi
                                    [31] | 2014 | Yazd | T:400/
                                    B:200\nG:200\n | DMFT/dmft:\nT:
                                    5.09±1.95\n | B:
                                    5.12±2.02\nG: 5.07±1.89\n | 6 |
| Sajadi [32] | 2014 | Sirjan,
                                    Kerman | B:700 | DMFT:
                                    3.56±2.34 | SiC:
                                    6.04±1.32 CF:20.3% | 8 |
| Khosravani
                                    [33] | 2014 | Shiraz | 974 | DMFT:\nT:
                                    0.94±1.46\nB: 0.93±1.49\n | G:
                                    0.96±1.44\nCF:58.7%\n | 5 |
| Kalantari [34] | 2014 | Shemiranat,
                                    Tehran | T:400\nB:204\nG:196\n | dmft:2.46\nCF:36.2%\nDental
                                    caries: 63.4% (in primary dentition)\n |  | 7 |
| Mehrabkhani
                                    [35] | 2014 | Mashhad m | T:143/ B:80/
                                    G:64 | dmft:
                                    6.1±5.4 | Dental caries:
                                    81.8% (in primary dentition) | 4 |
| Gharibi [36] | 2014 | Paveh | B:1104 | DMFT:
                                    7.91±3.78\nDT: 4.71±2.72\nMT:
                                    1.70±2.04\n | FT:
                                    1.50±1.95\nCF: 4.4%\n | 9 |
| Mohebbi [37] | 2014 | Tehran | T: 499/ B:240
                                    G:259 | DMFT:11.74±6.78
                                    DT: 4.38±3.67 | MT:
                                    4.29±6.41 FT: 3.07±3.23 | 4 |
| Asgari [38] | 2014 | Isfahan | T:
                                    592\nB:280\nG:312\n | DMFT:\nT:
                                    2.79±2.7\nB: 2.78\nG: 2.80\n | DT:
                                    1.39±1.7\nMT: 0.13±0.4\nFT:
                                    1.29±2.16\nCF: 26%\nSiC: 5.8±2.1\n | 7 |
| Ahmadi-Motamayel
                                    [39] | 2013 | Hamedan | T:200\nB:100\nG:100\n | DMFT:
                                    7.89±3.48\nDT: 3.26±2.90\n | MT:
                                    1.02±1.45\nFT: 3.70±3.85\n | 5 |
| Nabipour [40] | 2013 | Varamin | T:838\nB:472\nG:366\n | dmft:\nT:
                                    3.99±4.036\nB: 3.93±4.04\nG: 4.07±4.03\n | Urban:
                                    3.91±4.04\nRural: 4.62±3.98\nDental caries:
                                    78.1% (in primary dentition)\nCF: 28.2%\n | 7 |
| Nokhostin [41] | 2013 | Kermanshah | 1050 | DMFT:\nT:
                                    0.36±0.8\nB: 0.40±0.87\nG: 0.31±0.74\n | dmft:\nT:
                                    3.04±2.65\nB: 3.22±2.71\n | 6 |
| Abedini [42] | 2013 | Kashan | T:310\nB:159\nG:151\n | dmft:\nT:
                                    1.57±2.3\nB: 1.57±2.39\n | G:
                                    1.58±2.3\nCF: 51.3%\n | 6 |
| Faezi [43] | 2013 | Tehran | G:950 | DMFT:
                                    3.56±2.652 in 12 years, 2.961±4.26 | in 13 years
                                    and 4.38±2.899 in 14 years | 7 |
| Hazavei [44] | 2012 | Hamedan | T:268\nB:135\nG:133\n | DMFT:\nT:
                                    2.25±1.74\n | B:
                                    1.81±1.65\nG: 2.71±1.71\n | 5 |
| Jessri [45] | 2012 | Tehran | T:1271\nB:577\nG:694\n | DMFT:2.70±2.14\ndmft:
                                    2.30±2.42\n | Dental caries:
                                    85.14% (65.9% in primary dentition and 70.2% in permanent
                                    dentition) | 6 |
| Deyhimi [46] | 2011 | Isfahan | T:202/ B:82/
                                    G:120 | DMFT:4.43±4.494 |  | 7 |
| Davari [47] | 2011 | Yazd | B:475 | DMFT:
                                    4.8±3.13\nDT: 3.72±2.87\nMT:
                                    0.33±0.92\nFT: 0.75±1.67\nCF:11.5%\n | DMFT:
                                    4.85±3.51\nDT: 3.51±3.1, MT:
                                    0.2±0.7\nFT: 1.15±2.1\nCF:12.5%\nDental caries:
                                    87.5%\n | 4 |
| Eslamipour
                                    [48] | 2011 | Isfahan | T:810\nB:371\nG:439\n |  |  | 7 |
| Ghasempour
                                    [49] | 2011 | Babol | T:600\nB:300\nG:300\n | Caries
                                    prevalence: T: 65.7%\nB: 66%\n | G: 65.4%\nCF:
                                    34.3%\n | 5 |
| Sadeghi [50] | 2011 | Rafsanjan,
                                    Kerman | T:747\nB:353\nG:394\n | DMFT\nT: 2.83
                                    ± 2.2\nB: 3.15 ± 2.1\nG: 2.51 ± 2.3\n | DT: 2.03
                                    ± 2.1\nMT: 0.16 ± 0.5\nFT: 0.64 ±
                                    1.3\nCF: 16.1%\n | 7 |
| Aghighi [51] | 2010 | Tehran | T:4666\nB:2169\nG:2497\n | DMFT:
                                    3.50±2.7\nDental Caries:\nT: 89.3%\n | B: 87.4%\nG:
                                    91.2%\nCF: 10.7%\n | 5 |
| Karimi
                                    Zarchi [52] | 2010 | Tehran | T:401\nB:202\nG:199\n | DMFT:\nT:1.01±1.47\nB:
                                    0.93±1.44\nG:
                                    1.08±1.49\nDT:1.01±1.47\nMT:0.61±1.51\nFT:0.42±0.95\n | dmft:\nT:
                                    5.29±3.52\nB: 5.48±3.61\nG:
                                    5.09±0.42\ndt: 3.01±2.95\nmt:
                                    0.47±0.88\nft: 1.78±2.0\n | 7 |
| Mohebbi [53] | 2009 | Gonabad,
                                    Khorasan Razavi | T:529\nB:266\nG:263\n | DMFT:\nT:1.04±0.22\nB:1.02±0.17\nG:1.07±0.28\nDT:
                                    0.78±0.38\nMT:0.17±0.18\nFT:0.09±0.12\n | dmft:\nT:
                                    3.86±1.11\nB: 3.74±1.07\nG:
                                    3.99±1.16\ndt: 2.62±1.65\nmt:
                                    0.77±0.96\nft: 0.47±0.84\nCF: 8.3%\n | 8 |
| Torabi [54] | 2009 | Kerman | T:154/ M:60/
                                    F:94 | DMFT:10.88±6.47\nMen:11.05±6.19\n | Femal:10.85±6.65\nCF:
                                    0%\n | 6 |
| Sadeghi [55] | 2009 | Rafsanjan,
                                    Kerman | T:353\nB:180\nG:173\n | DMFT:\nT:
                                    2.46 ± 2\nB: 2.78 ± 1.8\n | G: 2.13
                                    ± 2.1\nCF: 20.7%\n | 5 |
| Hematyar [56] | 2009 | Tehran | T:200/B:106/G:94 | dmft:
                                    2.32±2.56 | Dental Caries:
                                    63.5 % | 7 |
| Seyed
                                    Akhavan [57] | 2008 | Karaj | T:768\nB:384\nG:384\n | DMFT:\nB:
                                    3.59±2.59\nG: 2.67±2.21\n | CF:\nB:
                                    13.5%\nG: 21.9%\n | 7 |
| Hamissi [58] | 2008 | Qazvin | T:780\nB:390\nG:390\n | DMFT:
                                    2.71±0.86\nB: 2.88±0.61\nG: 2.54±0.71\n | DT:
                                    2.23±0.90\nMT: 0.23±0.86\nFT:
                                    0.25±0.07\nCF: 24.5%\n | 5 |
| Yazdani [59] | 2008 | Tehran | T:500\nB:260\nG:246\n | DMFT; T:
                                    2.1\nB:2.0, G:2.2\nDT=0.9, MT= 0.2, and\n | FT=1.0\nSiC:5.2\nCF;
                                    T: 40%, B:44% and G:37%\n | 7 |
| Eskandarian
                                    [60] | 2006 | Shiraz | T:280/ B:150/
                                    G:130 | dmft:
                                    2.87±3.26 | \n | 6 |
| Broumand [61] | 2006 | Tehran | T:170/B:88/G:82 | DMFT:3.117 | Dental Caries:
                                    70.8%/CF: 29.2% | 4 |
| Meyer-Lueckel
                                    [62] | 2006 | Tehran,
                                    Semnan | T:523\nB:256\nG:267\n | 1) in
                                    6-year-old pupils in Tehran\ndmft: T: 3.3±2.7\nB:
                                    3.0±2.1\nG: 3.5±3.1\ndt:1.3, mt: 0.1 and ft:1.7,
                                    CF: 17%\n2) in 6-year-old pupils in Semnan\ndmft: T:
                                    3.3±2.9\nB: 4.2±3.1\nG: 2.4±2.5\ndt:3.0,
                                    mt:0.2 and ft: 0.1, CF: 19%\nCF: 30%\n | 3) in
                                    9-year-old pupils in Tehran, dmft: T: 2.6±2.2; B:
                                    3.0±2.5; G: 2.4±2.1\ndt:1.0, mt:NR and ft:1.4,
                                    CF:23%\n4) in 9-year-old pupils in Semnan, dmft: T:
                                    2.1±2\nB: 2.5±2.0\nG: 2.1±2.0\ndt: 2.1,
                                    mt: NR and ft: 0.2,\n | 4 |
| Javadinejad
                                    [63] | 2006 | Isfahan | 340 | DMFT: 2.4 | SiC:4.6 | 4 |
| Salem [64] | 2006 | Langrood,
                                    Lahijan, Siahkal | T:885\nB:454\nG:431\n | 1)
                                    Langrood\nDMFT;\nT:1.65±1.61\nB:1.68±1.61\nG:1.61±1.5\nDT:1.39,
                                    MT:0.06 and FT:0.2\nCF: 33.3%\n | 2) Lahijan
                                    /DMFT;\nT:1.49±1.56;\nB:1.29±1.44;\nG:1.70±1.68;
                                    DT:1.1, MT:0.02 and FT:0.37; CF: 39.3%\n3) Siahkal\nDMFT;
                                    T:1.60±1.4; B:1.45±1.38\nG:1.77±1.51;
                                    DT:1.38, MT:0.15 and FT:0.07; CF: 34.4%\n | 6 |
| Houshmand [65] | 2006 | Hamedan | T:238/ B:113/
                                    G:125 | Caries
                                    prevalence: T:85.3% B:85.8% | G:84.8% CF:
                                    14.7% | 4 |
| Ajami [66] | 2006 | Mashhad | T:1938\nB:948\nG:990\n | T:1938\nB:948\nG:990\n | 1)Teheran\nDMFT:1.10
                                    ±1.50\nDFS:1.59 ±2.59\nCF: 52.3%\n2)Villages
                                    near Esfahan\nDMFT:0.38 ±0.82\nDFS: 0.70
                                    ±1.73\nCF: 77.3%\n | 4 |
| Momeni [67] | 2006 | Teheran
                                    Isfahan | 1102 |  |  | 4 |
| Toomarian [68] | 2005 | Qom | T:300\nB:150\nG:150\n | DMFT;\nT:2.28
                                    ±2.1\nB:2.78 ±2.18\n | G:2.87
                                    ±2.03\nSiC:5.15±1.45\nCF: 10.7%\n | 7 |
| Vejdani [69] | 2005 | Guilan | T:261/B:111/G:147 | dmft:1.79 | CF: 36.4% ECC:
                                    28% | 5 |
| Daneshkazemi
                                    [70] | 2005 | Yazd | T:1223\nB:654\nG:569\n | DMFT:\nT:1.8±1.75\nB:1.95±1.91\n | G:1.65±1.55\nDental
                                    caries: 74.73%\nCF; T: 28.6%, B: 27.25%, G: 30.05%\n | 5 |
| Kazerouni [71] | 2005 | Tehran | T:1024\nB:528\nG:496\n | DMFT:1.5±1.5\nDT:1.9±1.2\nMT:0.1±0.5\nFT:0.2±0.7\n | dmft:6.2±2.7\ndt:3.6±2.6\nmt:1.2±1.6\nft:1.2±1.9\nCF:
                                    22.1%\n | 6 |
| Davari [72] | 2004 | Ardakan | T:607\nB:303\nG:304\n | DMFT:1.45±1.5\nDT:1.141±1.41\nMT:0.0779±0.34\n | FT:0.235±0.67\nCF:
                                    41%\n | 6 |
| Ramezani [73] | 2004 | Dayer,
                                    Boshehr | T:506\nB:281\nG:225\n | DMFT;
                                    T:1.8±1.7, B:1.98±1.67\nG:1.65±1.76\n | DT=1.62±1.66,
                                    MT= 0.04±0.22, FT=0.13±0.45 | 4 |
| Ghandehari
                                    [74] | 2003 | Tehran | T:400\nB:240\nG:160\n | Dmft\nT:
                                    2.45\nB:2.41\nG:2.51\n | dt: 1.95,
                                    mt:0.43, ft:0.07\nCF: 48.3%\n | 5 |
| Ghandehari-Motlagh
                                    [75] | 2003 | Guilan | T:144\nB:76\nG:68\n | DMFT\nT:1.68±1.78\nB:1.44±1.64\nG:1.96±1.91\n | DT:1.47±1.65\nMT:0.28±0.14\nFT:0.18±0.67\nCF:
                                    36.1%\n | 6 |
| Saneie [76] | 2003 | Khomain | T:713\nB:365\nG:348\n | DMFT\nT:
                                    0.15±0.53\nB:0.12±0.47\nG:0.18±0.59\nUrban:
                                    0.15±0.53\nRural: 0.19±0.60\n | dental caries:
                                    84.1% in primary dentition and11.8% in permanent dentition
                                    /dmft\nT:4.02±3.34\nB: 4.26±3.57\nG:
                                    3.76±3.08\nUrban: 3.88±3.38\nRural:
                                    4.30±3.27\n | 8 |
| Fani [77] | 2003 | Bavanat,
                                    Fars | T:407/B:271/
                                    G:136 | DMFT/
                                    T:2.25±1.9 B:2.33±1.98 | G:2.09±1.73
                                    CF: 25.6% | 8 |
| Mortazavi [78] | 2002 | Boshehr | T:506/ B:281/
                                    G:225 | DMFT:1.8±2.33
                                    DT: 1.62±1.66 | MT:
                                    0.04±0.22 FT: 0.13±0.45 | 3 |
| Memar [79] | 2000 | Sanandaj | T:439/ B:224/
                                    G:215 | DMFT\nT:2.6±2.33\nB:
                                    2.67±1.79\n | G:
                                    2.52±1.84\nCF: 15.7%\n | 8 |
| Eskandarizadeh
                                    [80] | 1999 | Sirjan | T:300\nB:15\nG:150\n | Caries
                                    prevalence: 65.3% | CF ;T:
                                    34.7%\nB:39.3%, G:30%\n | 4 |
| Gholami [81] | 1998 | Tehran | 254 | DMFT:5.5±3.6 | CF: 57% | 3 |
**Table 2**

*Dental caries status and DMFT/dmft data using Random Effect
                            Meta-Analysis.*

| Dental caries
                                    index | Number of
                                    studies | Prevalence % | Confidence
                                    interval 95% (CI%95) | Heterogeneity
                                    index I2 (%) |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Dental caries |
| Total | 54 | 72.8 | 69.2- 76.4 | 99.1% |
| Boys | 22 | 75.3 | 70.6- 80 | 97.55% |
| Girls | 22 | 74.9 | 70.3 –
                                    79.5 | 97.7% |
| DT | 13 | 59.0 | 44.0 –
                                    73.0 | 99.7% |
| MT | 10 | 6.0 | 4.0 –
                                    8.0 | 92.3% |
| FT | 10 | 21.0 | 12.0 –
                                    30.0 | 99.1% |
| dt | 7 | 70.0 | 53.0 –
                                    87.0 | 99.6% |
| mt | 6 | 0.9 | 4.0 –
                                    13.0 | 96.4% |
| ft | 7 | 14.0 | 9.0 –
                                    18.0 | 89.4% |
| CF |
| Total | 54 | 27.2 | 23.5-30.8 | 99.1% |
| Boys | 23 | 24.33 | 19.8-28.9 | 97.5% |
| Gils | 23 | 26.0 | 21.0-30.0 | 97.8% |
| The mean
                                    dmft\\DMFT |
|  | Number of
                                    studies | Mean | (95% CI) | I2
                                    (%) |
| DMFT |
| Total | 48 | 2.33 | 2.12 –
                                    2.54 | 99.7% |
| Boys | 29 | 1.97 | 1.75 –
                                    2.19 | 99.7% |
| Gils | 29 | 1.94 | 1.71 –
                                    2.16 | 99.5% |
| Urban | 5 | 1.89 | 1.21 –
                                    2.57 | 99.8% |
| Rural | 5 | 2.35 | 1.46 –
                                    3.24 | 99.8% |
| DT |
| Total | 22 | 1.95 | 1.59 –
                                    2.31 | 99.7% |
| Boys | 8 | 1.40 | 0.91 –
                                    1.88 | 99.7% |
| Gils | 8 | 1.48 | 0.96 –
                                    2.0 | 95.5% |
| MT |
| Total | 18 | 0.20 | 0.15 –
                                    0.25 | 99.55% |
| Boys | 8 | 0.13 | 0.03 –
                                    0.23 | 99.7% |
| Gils | 8 | 0.11 | 0.03 –
                                    0.18 | 99.8% |
| FT |
| Total | 17 | 0.32 | 0.26 –
                                    0.38 | 99.4% |
| Boys | 8 | 0.23 | 0.17 –
                                    30.0 | 97.4% |
| Gils | 8 | 0.38 | 0.26 –
                                    0.50 | 99% |
| dmft |
| Total | 30 | 3.86 | 3.49 –
                                    4.22 | 99.5% |
| Boys | 19 | 3.72 | 3.35 –
                                    4.09 | 98.7% |
| Gils | 19 | 3.54 | 2.86 –
                                    4.23 | 99.8% |
| Urban | 4 | 4.25 | 3.88 –
                                    4.62 | 89.4% |
| Rural | 4 | 4.98 | 4.45 –
                                    5.51 | 95.24% |
| dt |
| Total | 11 | 3.49 | 2.87 –
                                    4.11 | 99.3% |
| Boys | 8 | 2.54 | 1.79 –
                                    3.30 | 98.9% |
| Gils | 8 | 2.50 | 2.09 –
                                    2.91 | 99.9% |
| mt |
| Total | 9 | 0.50 | 0.30 –
                                    0.69 | 98.7% |
| Boys | 8 | 0.39 | 0.22 –
                                    0.57 | 99.6% |
| Gils | 8 | 0.33 | 0.17 –
                                    0.49 | 99.6% |
| ft |
| Total | 9 | 0.67 | 0.50 –
                                    0.84 | 99.0% |
| Boys | 8 | 0.36 | 0.25 –
                                    0.47 | 96.9% |
| Gils | 8 | 0.50 | 0.32 –
                                    0.68 | 98.5% |
| SiC |
| Total | 8 | 6.88 | 5.34 –
                                    8.52 | 99.9% |
| Boys | 3 | 7.65 | 5.20 –
                                    10.10 | 99.7% |
| Gils | 3 | 7.48 | 4.86 –
                                    10.10 | 99.8% |
**Table 3**

*The factors affecting on dental caries in population age range of fewer
                            than 18 years old in Iran.*

| Factors | Number of
                                    studies | The mean
                                    DMFT/dmft | I2
                                    (%) |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| High
                                    socioeconomic position | 3 | 2.93 (0.85
                                    – 5.01) | 99.7% |
| Low
                                    socioeconomic position | 3 | 3.67 (0.34
                                    – 7.0) | 99.8% |
| Education, Low | 15 | 3.33 (2.67
                                    – 4.00) | 99.3% |
| Education,
                                    Academic | 15 | 2.26 (1.72
                                    – 2.80) | 99.4% |
| Income, Salary | 2 | 2.31 (1.81
                                    – 2.82) | 99.55 |
| Income, Low | 2 | 2.39 (1.51
                                    – 3.28) | 97.8% |
| Occupation,
                                    Unemployed | 5 | 3.05 (1.69
                                    – 4.41) | 99.6% |
| Occupation,
                                    Employed | 5 | 2.38 (1.50
                                    – 3.27) | 99.6% |
| Children in
                                    family-Maximum | 9 | 2.88 (2.16
                                    – 3.59) | 98.9% |
| Children in
                                    family- Minimum | 9 | 2.00 (1.49
                                    – 2.51) | 98.9% |
| Carbohydrate
                                    consumption, Maximum | 2 | 4.33 (3.02
                                    – 5.65) | 98.8% |
| Carbohydrate
                                    consumption, Minimum | 2 | 2.04 (-0.82,
                                    4.90) | 99.8% |
| Toothbrush,
                                    Maximum | 13 | 1.94 (1.34
                                    – 2.53) | 99.3% |
| Toothbrush,
                                    Minimum | 13 | 2.99 (2.05
                                    – 3.94) | 99.7% |
| Dental visits-
                                    Maximum | 5 | 2.59 (1.87
                                    – 3.32) | 98.1% |
| Dental visits-
                                    Minimum | 5 | 2.66 (2.15
                                    – 3.16) | 96.5% |
**Table 4**

*Distribution of Dental caries and DMFT/dmft data according to age.*

| Variables | ˂6
                                    years | 6 years | 9 years | 12 years | 12-18 years |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Dental caries
                                    (%) | 71 (65-77) | 56 (36-75) | 73 (54-91) | 68 (61-76) | 72 (62-82) |
| DMFT(mean) | - | 0.85(0.33-1.37) | 2.13(1.88-2.39) | 2.52(2.17-2.86) | 3.71(3.19-
                                    4.23) |
| dmft (mean) | 3.99(3.33-4.65) | 4.92(4.30-5.53) | 3.80(3.37-4.24) | 0.76(0.42-1.10) | - |
| SiC (mean) | - | - | - | 6.73(5.37-8.10) | 7.71(6.61-
                                    8.9) |
## Selected Articles

A flowchart describing the systematic review search results is presented in Figure 1. The literature
                    searches yielded 1,645 articles,\nof which 317 papers were repetitive\nand
                    removed from further consideration. We also excluded 1,221 citations after
                    screening the titles and abstracts as clearly irrelevant to study objectives and
                    for failing\nto meet the eligibility criteria, leaving 107 papers for full-text
                    review. Of the remainder, another 38 articles after full-text screening were
                    excluded; finally, sixty-nine\npapers were potentially relevant and eligible for
                    the final analysis (Figure 1
                    ).

## Description of the Studies

The studies used in this meta-analysis were published between1998-2018 and all
                    were cross-sectional in design (13,81). The general characteristics and findings
                    of the studies that\nfulfilled the eligibility criteria are summarized in Table 1. In most reviewed studies, the
                    sampling method was random cluster sampling;\ninformation and data were
                    collected through\ninterviews and clinical examination by appropriately
                    qualified practitioner/researchers or through health records databases. Data on
                    the dental caries prevalence, experience,\nor incidence were available for 54
                    studies and eight studies presented data related to significant caries (Sic).
                    Fifteen studies analyzed decayed, missing or filled teeth in primary
                    teeth\n(dmft), thirty-five studies analyzed decayed, missing or filled teeth in
                    permanent teeth (DMFT), and sixteen studies investigated both. The quality
                    assessment of the individual studies is\nsummarized in Table 1.

Most studies were of strong or moderate quality and only three studies deemed to
                    be rated weak. Almost all studies were conducted in children and adolescents
                    (age range of fewer than 18\nyears old) except 4 studies that were conducted on
                    adult population. The sample size of those studies in adult population was 1,055
                    individuals (482 male and 573 female). While, sample size\nfor children and
                    adolescents population was 45,493 individuals (49.61% boys); in overall,
                    considering all the included studies, the total number of participants was
                    46,548 individuals.

Given the limited studies in adult age groups, the data were not sufficient to
                    compute many variables and factors; so, only the mean DMFT was calculated in
                    adult age groups and other results\nand analyzes were only calculated in the age
                    group less than 18 years old.

## Main analysis



Visual inspection of these forest plots indicates a high level of heterogeneity;
                    I2 values for DMFT and dmft were 99.7%, and 99.5%, respectively.\nIn
                    addition, chi-square test provided a significant p Value (<0.001), which
                    confirms the heterogeneity between studies. Data on the mean DMFT in\nadult were
                    available for four studies and we were able to calculate mean DMFT; accordingly
                    mean DMFT index based on a random effect model was 8.75\n(95% CI,
                    5.47–12.03), which indicates that heterogeneity was significant (I2
                    = 99%, p< 0.001).

We found that the mean of DMFT indexes was similar based on sex, and differed
                    based on urban/rural residence. The mean DMFT was higher in rural than urban
                    regions\n(2.35 vs. 1.89). Similar results were obtained for dmft indexes (Table 2). The average of decayed (d),
                    missing (m), and filled\n(f) teeth in primary and in permanent teeth are shown
                    in Table 2. These rates were almost
                    similar in boys and girls,\nexpect for filled teeth in primary (ft.) and
                    permanent teeth (FT). We observed that the mean both ft.\nand FT were
                    significantly higher in girls than boys (0.50 vs. 0.36 for dmft and 0.38 vs.
                    0.23 for DMFT). Eight studies reporting significant caries (Sic) were
                    collected\nfor calculating the overall estimation of this index; our results
                    showed that the mean Sic was calculated as 6.88 (95%CI=5.34-8.52).

## The factors affecting on dental caries

We performed a separate meta-analysis for the association between the
                    children’s demographic factors and their dental caries experience
                    (DMFT/dmft>0).\nThe results are presented in Table 3; as shown, the mean dental caries was higher
                    in those children whose family had\nlow socioeconomic position and income
                    than\nthose their family had high socioeconomic position (3.76 vs. 2.93) and
                    higher income (2.39 vs. 2.31). Moreover, lower scores of caries index were found
                    in the\nchildren who had academic educated (2.26 vs. 3.33) and employed parents
                    (2.38 vs. 3.05). The average dental caries in children from crowded families was
                    greater than\nsparsely populated families (2.88 vs. 2.0). We found that
                    excessive carbohydrate intake is significantly increase the incidence of dental
                    caries; so that, dental caries\nmean was 4.33 in children who had high levels of
                    carbohydrate intake and 2.04 in those who were less likely to use it. In
                    addition, the frequency of children’s tooth brushing\nwas related to
                    dental caries experience; children with more tooth brushing times showed less
                    caries (1.94 vs. 2.99). Average of dental caries in children who had more
                    dental\nvisits was lower than those whom had not visited a dentist (2.59 vs.
                    2.66).

## Sensitivity and Subgroup Analyses

Due to high heterogeneity among reviewed studies, we conducted subgroup analyses
                    based on age group and region to minimize heterogeneity.\nTable 4 presents the results of subgroup analyses.
                    Studies based on age group were divided to five groups as follow: younger than
                    6, 6, 9,\n12 and 12-18 years; and the dental caries prevalence was 71%, 56%,
                    73%, 68% and 72%, respectively. The prevalence was almost similar in all\nother
                    age groups expect for the group of 6-year-old subjects who had the smallest
                    frequency of dental caries (56%). The mean DMFT index was\n0.85, 2.13, 2.52, and
                    3.71 in age group6, 9, 12 and 12-18 years, respectively. We found a direct
                    relationship between DMFT index and age,\nas the age increased, the mean of DMFT
                    increased. We also observed an inverse relationship between dmft and age; the
                    average of dmft index was\n3.99, 4.92, 3.80 and 0.76 in age group ˂ 6,
                    6, 9, and 12 years, respectively. Mean Sic was higher in age group 12-18 years
                    than age group 12 years\n(7.71 vs. 6.73) which indicates that it increases with
                    age. In this study, we also performed a subgroup analyses according to region of
                    residence\nand found that the average of dental caries, DMFT and dmft values
                    were differ based on region of residence (data not shown). A sensitive analysis
                    was\nalso performed in the current research to find the effect of influential
                    studies on the overall results. We found no special study to change the overall
                    results.

## Publication Bias

Publication bias was checked using a Begg’s funnel plot (Figure 3).\nAn asymmetric
                    funnel plot indicates no publication or study bias; so,\nthe effect of bias was
                    not significant when Begg’s funnel plot evaluated (p= 0.633).
                    Egger’s test was also used for confirmation of the absence of
                    publication bias and result\nshowed no evidence of publication bias in this
                    study (t= 0.11, p= 0.913) (Figure
                    3).

## Discussion

In the present study, we considered the dental caries status and its confounding
                factors in our systematic search.

The total rate of dental caries was 72.8% (d: 70%, m: 0.9%, and f: 14%, D: 59%, M:
                6%, and F: 21%, respectively). The mean of DMFT values was 2.33\n(D: 1.95, M: 0.20,
                and F: 0.32, respectively) and dmft values was 3.86 (d: 3.49, m: 0.50, and f: 0.67,
                respectively). These findings showed that the\nprevalence of dental caries among
                children and adolescents (< 18 years of age] in Iran was high. To the best
                of our knowledge, this study is the\nfirst research that have provided information
                using meta-analysis regarding the dental caries status, and associated factors in
                Iran. Already, several\nnationwide surveys have been carried out to describe the
                oral health status of children in the Islamic Republic of Iran; in the first
                national oral health survey\nin 1998, the percentage of dental caries among 6- and
                9-year-old children in 1998–99 was 86.2% and 88.5% respectively. The mean
                dmft were 1.8, 4.8, and 0.9 for 6, 9,\nand 12 year-olds. In addition, the mean DMFT
                were 0.2, 3.4, and 1.5 for 6, 9, and 12-year-olds respectively [ 82\n]. A second nationwide survey in 2004, using WHO
                guidelines, were reported the dental caries rates (52%, 89%, 90% and 68%) and the
                mean dmft value (1.9, 5.0, 3.6 and 0.6 P)\nin 3, 6, 9 and 12 years old children;
                also the mean DMFT indices were 0.2, 0.9 and 1.9 for 6, 9 and 12-year-old children,
                respectively [ 83\n]. Caries rates in
                another descriptive nationwide study in 2009‒2010 among first-year students
                of elementary, junior and high schools in 32 provinces in Iran were 59.06%,\n47.23%
                and 40.98% respectively [ 84\n].These data
                supported by the findings of the present study and showed that the dental caries
                status in Iran was expected to be bad. Similar to our findings, the caries
                prevalence\nin the reported studies of Asian countries was high and it is of special
                concern for Middle Eastern populations. The caries prevalence and mean dmft score
                among preschool children\nin Southeast Asia were 79% and 5.1, respectively [ 85\n, 87\n].
                A systematic review in Arab League countries reported a mean dmft score of 4.5 in
                2-7 years old children [ 86\n]. Another
                systematic review and meta-analysis of 34 reviewed studies found the overall mean
                dmft in the primary teeth was 5.14 with prevalence of 80.9% in pre-school\nchildren
                in the Gulf Cooperation Council area [ 87\n].
                In addition, the prevalence of dental caries in Iran is much closer to that in some
                Latin American countries. A systematic review and meta-analysis in Latin
                American\nand Caribbean children from seventy-five studies showed that caries
                prevalence in Brazil and other investigated countries for primary teeth in 5-6 years
                old children were 52% and 70%,\nand for permanent teeth in 11-12 years old children
                were 56% and 63%, respectively [ 88\n].
                Also the prevalence of early childhood caries among 5-6 year-old children in South
                Africa and Swaziland, was 57%, and the mean dmft score was 3.1 [ 85\n].These data showed the inappropriate dental caries
                status in Iran and other developing countries. Unlikely, the prevalence of dental
                caries in developed\ncountries was much lower; the caries prevalence in
                schoolchildren was 26.2% in Germany [ 89\n],
                30% in France [ 90\n], 27.6% in Great
                Britain [ 91\n], 23% in USA [ 92\n] and 28% in UK [ 93\n]. Comparing these findings with our data showed that
                the prevalence rate of dental caries among children is markedly higher in Iran
                compared to developed countries.

The high prevalence and experience of dental caries in Iran compared to developed
                countries is because of ineffective oral health national preventive programs\nand
                lack of educational measures [ 94\n, 95\n], which implemented in developed
                countries. One of the other reasons might be explained by increased fluoride
                consumption [ 96\n]. Current evidence shows
                that adequate fluoride in drinking water can help prevent dental carries [ 97\n].This is while fluoride concentration in
                drinking water in most regions in Iran is lower than the standard level [ 98\n]. In addition, the results of our
                meta-analysis showed that frequency of tooth brushing is related to dental caries
                experience. Thus, poor oral health and \nlow oral hygiene could to some extend
                explain the reason of observed high prevalence of dental caries in Iran.
                Furthermore, we observed that children had a \nlarge proportion of untreated dental
                caries and a low proportion of filled teeth (data are shown in table 3), this finding indicate insufficient
                attention\nof parents to preventive and restorative needs of their children. These
                results explain the inappropriate dental caries status in Iran, which is
                consistent\nwith studies, conducted in developing and under, developed countries,
                and contradict with those reported in developed countries.

We observed no differences in caries status between boys and girls; this figure was
                observed regarding all components' dmft and DMFT expects for ft.\nand FT; our
                results showed a high proportion of the mean both ft. and FT in girls than boys (table 3). The increase in the number of filled
                teeth in girls than\nboys may influence by a variety of behavioral, environmental,
                and physiological factors [ 99\n]; this
                difference can be also due to sex discrimination because in our country parents
                commonly pay more attention to the appearance of their girls than boys do\n[ 13\n, 14
                \n].

We also observed the chance of developing DMFT increases by age and this trend was
                found in most cohorts over time [ 100\n].
                Caries experience is more likely to increase with increasing age of children because
                as the age increases, teeth exposure to cariogenic diet increases, which
                accelerates\nthe decay and erosion of teeth [ 101
                \n, 102\n]. Our study, similar to others
                showed that the mean dmft was more prevalent in younger age groups because of lack
                of knowledge on efficient preventive behaviors in younger age,\ninappropriate eating
                habits such as frequent consumption of sugary foods and snacks, and higher caries
                resistance in permanent teeth compared to primary teeth\n[ 103\n, 104\n].

## Relationship between the children’s demographic factors and oral
                    hygiene with their dental caries status

We observed an invert association between parent’s education and their
                    children's dental caries. This finding is accordance to previous studies\n[ 105\n, 106\n]. The lack of awareness and necessary skills of
                    parents about the oral hygiene can be an explanation for this finding.
                    Educational background also\naffects oral health literacy, dietary habits, tooth
                    cleaning patterns, and health service utilization [ 105\n, 106\n].
                    The results of our study also demonstrated better dental health status in the
                    children whom their parent had a governmental occupation and higher \nincome
                    than others. A possible explanation is that having a governmental occupations
                    frequently increase income, thus families with higher income are able \nto spend
                    more budgets for access to preventive means such as toothpastes, dental floss,
                    and health service utilization [ 107\n].
                    We observed caries experience was more frequent among children from a poorer
                    socioeconomic position. A systematic review and meta-analysis study showed
                    that\nlow socioeconomic position is significantly associated with a higher risk
                    of having caries lesions or experience [ 108\n].
                    In most developed countries, dental services are universally available, while
                    they so expensive in developing countries like Iran and access to them might be
                    \nso difficult for people from a lower socioeconomic background [ 109\n]. Our meta-analysis indicated that
                    frequency of children’s tooth brushing is related to dental caries
                    experience. A systematic review and meta-analysis study showed\nthat infrequent
                    brushers were at greater risk for carious lesions incidence compared to those
                    who were brushing frequently; tooth brushing removes dental biofilm and in\nthis
                    way reduces the incidence and development of carious lesions [ 110\n]. The highly observed prevalence
                    of dental caries in this study demonstrates infrequent and non-acceptable
                    effectiveness of tooth brushing in children.\nThis highlights inadequate
                    educational program about tooth brushing skill and insufficient attention of the
                    parents to children’s oral hygiene. Similar to \nother studies, we
                    observed that children living in the rural residence had a worse dental status
                    compared to those children living in urban regions.\nThis could be explained by
                    difference in the context of cultural, nutritional habits, socioeconomic status,
                    geographical factors, and so forth; rural\nchildren generally have low
                    socioeconomic position and family income, low educated and unemployed parents,
                    crowded families, and difficulties in access to dental services\n[ 111\n, 112\n].

## Strengths and Limitations

This is the first meta-analysis of dental caries status and associated factors in
                    Iran, which have provided valuable information in a very large sample size.\nAs
                    dental caries is one of the most expensive diseases to treat, the results of
                    this study have major implications for oral health policy and planning
                    health\nservices. This study had also some limitations; first, we sought to
                    identify all the published studies for dental caries, however it is possible
                    some papers\nhave been missed due to time and resource constraints. Secondly,
                    the quality assessment of selected studies for this study may be subject to
                    criticism because\nthere is possible measurement error in assessing quality of
                    the studies. Third, dmft/DMFT index is used in this meta-analysis; these indices
                    underestimate the value\nof dental caries than the actual value because it is
                    inefficient in detecting dental cavities, and unable in determining the
                    non-cavitated lesions\n[ 113\n]. In
                    some countries, other indices such as International Caries Detection and
                    Assessment System (ICDAS) were used for assessing dental caries but this
                    approach is \nnot widely used in Iran. Thus, we did not obtain adequate data for
                    dental caries analysis based on ICDAS, although the DMFT/dmft index is
                    recommended for assessing dental\ncaries by WHO and is still considered as a
                    valid approach in many countries [ 114
                    \n, 115\n]. Other limitations in most
                    meta-analysis studies are heterogeneity. We conducted subgroup meta-analyses and
                    sensitivity analyses to explore this heterogeneity. However,\nin most cases,
                    heterogeneity could not be explained, accordingly, a random effects model was
                    applied to incorporate heterogeneity into our analyses. Furthermore, \nthe
                    possible effects of publication bias inherent in any meta-analysis cannot be
                    ruled out.

## Conclusion

The present study showed high prevalence of dental caries among children and
                adolescents (<18 years of age] in Iran. Moreover,\nwe found the percentage
                of children with experience of dental caries was too high. These data show the
                inappropriate dental caries status\nin Iran compared to developed countries and
                illustrate ineffective oral health national preventive programs, lack of educational
                measures,\ninadequate fluoride in drinking water, poor oral health, low oral
                hygiene, and insufficient attention of parents to needs of their children\nfor
                preventive and restorative dental treatments. Our findings indicate that educational
                programs about oral health in Iran is not adequate and\nnew preventive procedures,
                interventional measures, practical educational programs, and modern therapeutic
                methods are needed to improve oral\nhealth status specially for the children whose
                family have low socioeconomic position and income.

**Keywords:**
Dental Caries, Dental Decays, DMFT, Meta-Analysis, Iran

**Copyright:** Copyright: © Journal of Dentistry

## References

1 Urquhart O, Tampi MP, Pilcher L, Slayton RL, Araujo MWB, Fontana M, et al. Nonrestorative Treatments for Caries: Systematic Review and
                        Network Meta-analysis. *J Dent Res*. 2018;22034518800014:-. DOI: 
2 . 2018. Oral health [accessed\n2018 August 21]. **. ;:-. DOI: 
3 Butten K, Johnson NW, Hall KK, Anderson J, Toombs M, King N, et al. Risk factors for oral health in young, urban, Aboriginal and
                        Torres Strait Islander children. *Aust Dent J*. 2018;:-. DOI: 10.1111/adj.12662
4 Villavicencio J, Arango MC, Ordonez A, Contreras A, Villegas LM. Early childhood caries, salivary and microbiological aspects
                        among 3- to 4-year-old children in Cali, Colombia. *Eur Arch Paediatr Dent*. 2018;19:347-352. DOI: 10.1007/s40368-018-0365-5
5 . 1997. Oral Health Survey:\nbasic methods. Geneva, Switzerland:
                        World Health Organization. **. ;:-. DOI: 
6 Pezzementi ML1, Fisher MA. Oral health status of people with intellectual disabilities in
                        the southeastern United States. *J Am Dent Assoc*. 2005;136:903-912. DOI: 
7 Pattanaporn K, Navia JM. The relationship of dental calculus to caries, gingivitis, and
                        selected salivary factors in 11- to 13-year-old children in Chiang Mai,
                        Thailand. *J Periodontol*. 1998;69:955-961. DOI: 
8 Martins MT, Sardenberg F, Bendo CB, Abreu MH, Vale MP, Paiva SM, et al. Dental caries remains as the main oral condition with the
                        greatest impact on children's quality of life. *PLoS One*. 2017;12:e0185365-. DOI: 
9 Chapple IL, Bouchard P, Cagetti MG, Campus G, Carra MC, Cocco F. Interaction of lifestyle, behaviour or systemic diseases with
                        dental caries and periodontal diseases: consensus report of group 2 of the
                        joint EFP/ORCA workshop on the boundaries between caries and periodontal
                        diseases. *J Clin Periodontol*. 2017;44 Suppl 18:S39-S51. DOI: 
10 . Multilevel Analysis of Dental Caries in Swedish Children and
                        Adolescents in Relation to Socioeconomic Status. *Caries Res*. 2018;53:96-106. DOI: 
11 Peres MA, Macpherson LMD, Weyant RJ, Daly B, Venturelli R, Mathur MR, et al. Oral diseases: a global public health challenge. *Lancet*. 2019;394:249-260. DOI: 
12 Wells G, Shea B, O’connell D, Peterson J, Welch V, Losos M. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of
                        nonrandomised studies in meta-analyses. **. ;:-. DOI: 
13 Bashirian S, Shirahmadi S, Seyedzadeh-Sabounchi S, Soltanian AR, Karimi-Shahanjarini A, Vahdatinia F. Association of caries experience and dental plaque with
                        sociodemographic characteristics in elementary school-aged children: a
                        cross-sectional study. *BMC Oral Health*. 2018;8:7-. DOI: 
14 Shaghaghian S, Abolvardi M, Akhlaghian M. Factors Affecting Dental Caries of Preschool Children in Shiraz,
                        2014. *J Dent (Shiraz)*. 2018;19:100-108. DOI: 
15 Esmaeilzadeh S, Abbasi A, NikniazSh, Fathi B, Saeli E. Evaluation of Oral and Dental Health among 12 Year-Old Students
                        in Jolfa, East Azerbaijan. *Depiction of Health*. 2017;7:30-36. DOI: 
16 Usefi MA, Behroozpour K, Kazemi SA, Afroughi S. Evaluation of dental caries status in 7-12 years old students in
                        Bovair Ahmad township, Iran, 2014. *J Isfahan Dent Sch*. 2017;13:75-83. DOI: 
17 . Evaluation of DMFT and dmft Indexes and Affecting Factors in
                        Students of Hashtrood City in 2013-2014. *J Ilam Univ Med Sci*. 2017;25:179-186. DOI: 
18 Mehralian AR, Hosseinkhani Z, Padisar P, Poorsamimi J, Asefzadeh S, Pakpour A. Oral health status and oral self-care behaviors among children
                        aged 5-6 and 12 years in Qazvin Province (2013). *J Qazvin Univ Med Sci*. 2017;20:28-35. DOI: 
19 Amiri S, Veissi M, Saleki M, Rahmani M, Haghighizadeh MH. The Relationship between Dental Caries with Dietary Habits and
                        Body Mass Index in 4-6 Yearsold Kindergartens in Ahvaz. *Jundishapur Sci Med J*. 2017;16:91-102. DOI: 
20 Sistani MMN, Hataminia Z, Hajiahmadi M, Khodadadi E. Nine years' trend of dental caries and severe early childhood
                        caries among 3-6-year-old children in Babol, Northern Iran. *Electron Physician*. 2017;9:4683-4688. DOI: 
21 Khani-Varzegani F, Erfanparast L, Asghari-Jafarabadi M, Shokravi M, Azabdaftari F, Parto M. Early occurrence of childhood dental caries among low literate
                        families. *BMC Res Notes*. 2017;10:366-. DOI: 
22 Khodadadi E, Niknahad A, Sistani MM, Motallebnejad M. Parents' Oral Health Literacy and its Impact on their Children's
                        Dental Health Status. *Electron Physician*. 2016;8:3421-3425. DOI: 
23 Mahmoudi R, Zarei S, NaghiZade MM, Nabiei S, Sepahi S. Oral Health of Preschoolers and Elementary Students in Fasa
                        township (2014). *Iranian Journal of Pediatric Dentistry*. 2016;12:17-32. DOI: 
24 Marasouli P, Mohammadi Khoshrou M, Hoseinzadeh M, Niknejad E. Surveyo DMFT and DMFT indices in Urmia orphanages in 6-18
                        year-old individuals in 2014. *J Urmia Univ Med Sci*. 2016;27:729-734. DOI: 
25 Eskandarizadeh A, Nikian F, Torabi M, Karimi Afshar M. Assessment of Significant Caries in 6- year- old Children in
                        Kerman, 2011. *Journal of Health &amp; Development*. 2016;5:142-151. DOI: 
26 Golkari A, Sabokseir A, Sheiham A, Watt RG. Socioeconomic gradients in general and oral health of primary
                        school children in Shiraz, Iran. Version 1. F1000Res. **. 2016;5:767-. DOI: 
27 Rahimian ES, Haghgoo R, Amirabadi F, Javidi Hamidi R. Comparison of DMFT index in retarded 8-12 year-old students with
                        healthy subjects in Zahedan from 2013 to 2014. *Daneshvar Medicine*. 2015;22:57-64. DOI: 
28 Asdagh S, Nuroloyuni S, Amani F, Sadeghi Mazidi T. Dental Caries Prevalence among 6-12 Years Old School Children in
                        Ardabil City, 2012. *J Ardabil Univ Med Sci*. 2015;15:39-45. DOI: 
29 Alimorad A, Madani A, Radafshar, Zarei F. Study of DMFT index among primary school students (7-12 years
                        old) in Bandar Abbas city. *J Preventive Medicine*. 2015;2:21-28. DOI: 
30 Banihashemi-Rad SA, Movahed T, Partoie S, Sharifi M, Banihashem SA. Prevalence of dental caries experience among 8 to 11- years- old
                        students in primary school of Mashhad. *J Mashhad Med Council*. 2015;19:11-14. DOI: 
31 Bahrolooloomi Z, Soruri M, Rekabi M, Ravaie S. The relationship between BMI and DMFT/dmft among 7-11 Year-old
                        children in Yazd. *J Shahid Sadoughi Univ Med Sci*. 2014;21:751-758. DOI: 
32 Sajadi FS, Mosharafian Sh, Torabi M, Hajmohamadi S. Evaluation of DMFT index and Significant Caries Index in
                        12-year-old students in Sirjan, Kerman. *J Isfahan Dent Sch*. 2014;10:290-298. DOI: 
33 Khosravani R, Golkari A, Memarpour M. Assessing the Relationship between Dental Caries and
                        Anthropometric Indices in 9-11-Year-old Primary School Children of Shiraz. *Armaghane-Danesh, Yasuj Univ Med Sci J*. 2014;18:787-796. DOI: 
34 Kalantari B, Rahmannia J, Hatami H, Karkhaneh S, Farsar A, A, et al. The prevalence of dental caries in primary molars and its
                        related factors in 6 and 7 years old children in Shemiranat health center. *J Health in the Field*. 2014;1:7-13. DOI: 
35 Mehrabkhani M, Ajami B, Khademi M, Arastoo S. Evaluating Risk Factors of Dental Caries in Children under
                        6-Years-Old Supported by Welfare Organization of Mashhad in 2012. *J Mash Dent Sch*. 2014;38:257-266. DOI: 
36 Gharibi F, Jafar-Abadi MA, Amini B. Evaluation of oral hygiene status and its effective factors in
                        boy's elementary school students using DMFT, CF, and gingivitis inflammation
                        in 2013. *Depiction of Health*. 2014;5:5-12. DOI: 
37 Mohebbi SZ, Sheikhzadeh S, Batebi A, Bassir SH. Oral Impacts on Daily Performance in 20- to 50-yearolds
                        Demanding Dental Care in Tehran, Iran: Association with Clinical Findings
                        and Self-reported Health. *Oral Health Prev Dent*. 2014;12:29-36. DOI: 
38 Asgari I, EbnAhmady A. Social factors and dental health in the urban adolescents of
                        Isfahan, Iran. *Oral Health Dent Manag*. 2014;13:798-804. DOI: 
39 Ahmadi-Motamayel F, Seif N, Mortazavi H. Comparison of tooth caries status between medical and
                        non-medical students in Hamadan, Iran. *J Isfahan Dent Sch*. 2013;8:637-644. DOI: 
40 Nabipour AR, AzvarKh, Zolala F, Ahmadinia H, Soltani Z. The Prevalence of Early Dental Caries and Its Contributing
                        Factors among 3-6-Year-Old Children in Varamin, Iran. *J Health &amp; Development*. 2013;2:12-21. DOI: 
41 Nokhostin MR, Siahkamari A, Akbarzadeh Bagheban AR. Evaluation of oral and dental health of 6-12 year-old students
                        in Kermanshah city. *ISMJ*. 2013;16:241-249. DOI: 
42 Abedini H, Gilasi HR, Davoodi E, Eshghi T, Karbasi M, Heidarian M, et al. Prevalence and Causes of Decay In Primary Teeth of Children Aged
                        2-6 Years In Kashan. *J Ilam Univ Med Sci*. 2013;21:115-123. DOI: 
43 Faezi M, JalayerNaderi N, Lashkari S. Determination of association between some caries-related factors
                        in permanent teeth with body mass index of female school students in Tehran,
                        Iran. *J Isfahan Dent Sch*. 2013;9:152-161. DOI: 
44 Hazavei SM, SohrabiVafa M, Moeini B, Soltanian AR, Rezaei L. Assessment of oral- dental health status: using Health Belief
                        Model (HBM) in first grade guidance school students in Hamadan. *Jundishapur Journal of Health Sciences*. 2012;4:65-75. DOI: 
45 Jessri M, Jessri M, Rashidkhani B, Kimiagar SM. Oral health behaviours in relation to caries and gingivitis in
                        primary-school children in Tehran, 2008. *East Mediterr Health J*. 2013;19:527-534. DOI: 
46 Deyhimi P, Eslamipour F, Naseri H. DMFT and the effect of dental education on orodental health of
                        dental students in Isfahan School of Dentistry. *Journal of Isfahan Dental School*. 2011;6:384-389. DOI: 
47 Davari AR, Haerian A, Danesh-Kazemi AR, ZallaghiParchal M, Akbarian B. Prevalence and Comparison of DMFT in 15 Year Old Male High
                        School Students of Yazd City, 2002-2009. *J Shahid Sadoughi Univ Med Sci*. 2014;21:751-758. DOI: 
48 Eslamipour F, Asgari I, Heydari K, Farzanehkho AR. An epidemiologic study of prevalence of dental caries in 12-19
                        year-old schoolchildren in Isfahan. *Journal of Isfahan Dental School*. 2011;6:606-614. DOI: 
49 Ghasempour M, Hajian K, Moazzezi Z, Zovvar M. Relationship between BMI and dental caries index in preschool
                        children in Babol. *J Shahid Sadoughi Univ Med Sci*. 2011;7:280-287. DOI: 
50 Sadeghi M, Lynch CD, Arsalan A. Is there a correlation between dental caries and body mass
                        index-for-age among adolescents in Iran?. *Community Dent Health*. 2011;28:174-177. DOI: 
51 Aghighi S, Omrani L. Evaluation of DMFT index and level of teeth and mouth hygiene
                        education among students in air force military bases in the year 2008-2009. *J IRIAF Health Administration*. 2010;12:14-19. DOI: 
52 Karimi Zarchi A, Rabbani M M, Shahroodi P P. Comparison of teeth parameters and their related factors in 6-12
                        year old children. *Iranian Journal of Military Medicine*. 2010;12:137-142. DOI: 
53 Mohebi S, Ramezani A, Matlabi M, Mohammadpour L, Noor N, Hosseini ES. The survey of oral-dental health of grade 3 students of Gonabad
                        primary schools in 2007. *Ofogh-e-Danesh. GMUHS Journal*. 2009;15:69-77. DOI: 
54 Torabi M, Karimi-Afshar S, Sheikh-Zade A, Karimi-Afshar M. Evaluation of Oral Health Indicators of 35 to 44 Years Old in
                        Kerman. *J Isfahan Univ Med Sci*. 2009;5:93-98. DOI: 
55 Sadeghi M, Bagherian A. DMFT index and bilateral dental caries occurrence among
                        12-years-old students in Rafsanjan. *J RafsanjanUniv Med Sci*. 2009;7:267-274. DOI: 
56 Hematyar M, Masnavi A. Prevalence and risk factors of dental caries in 3-7 years-old
                        children referred to pediatric clinic of Islamic Azad University. *J Qazvin Univ Med Sci*. 2009;3:87-94. DOI: 
57 Seyed-Akhavan P, Azim-Zade N, Asady-Nejhad A. Evaluation of dental care status, therapeutic needs, DMFT and
                        its related factors in 12 year old students in Karaj city in 2004. *J Res Denl Sci*. 2008;5:26-34. DOI: 
58 Hamissi J, Ramezani GH, Ghodousi A. Prevalence of dental caries among high school attendees in
                        Qazvin, Iran. *J Indian Soc Pedod Prev Dent*. 2008;26 Suppl 2:S53-S55. DOI: 
59 Yazdani R, Vehkalahti MM, Nouri M, Murtomaa H. Oral health and treatment needs among 15-year-olds in Tehran,
                        Iran. *Community Dent Health*. 2008;25:221-225. DOI: 
60 Eskandarian T, Joshan MJ. Evaluation of the dmft Index and Its Relationship to Some
                        Factors Consisting the Consumption of Iron Supplementary Drugs in 2-5 Years
                        Old Kindergarden Children in Shiraz. *Shiraz Univ Dent J*. 2006;6:1-9. DOI: 
61 Broumand S, Sharififar S, Alikhani Sh. The study of caries free indicator of milk teeth in children age
                        3-6 at dare care center affiliated to health centers of Army. *J Military Health Sci Res*. 2006;4:828-835. DOI: 
62 Meyer-Lueckel H, Paris S, Shirkhani B, Hopfenmuller W, Kielbassa AM. Caries and fluorosis in 6- and 9-year-old children residing in
                        three communities in Iran. *Community Dent Oral Epidemiol*. 2006;34:63-70. DOI: 
63 Javadi-Nejhad Sh, Karami M, Azizi HR. Determination of the prevalence of dental caries in 12-year-old
                        children in Isfahan by significant caries index. *Journal of Isfahan Dental School*. 2006;2:13-17. DOI: 
64 Salem K, Nickedl M, Vejdani P, Gholami P. Survey DMFT index in twelve years old children. *J Gillan Univ Med Sci*. 2006;14:54-60. DOI: 
65 Houshmand B, Bakhour S, Amiry S, Mozaffary H. Evaluation of caries- free index in 5 year- old children of
                        Hamadan city and dental treatment needs in 2004. *Hakim Research Journal*. 2006;9:39-43. DOI: 
66 Ajami B, Ebrahimi M. Evaluation of oral health status amongst 6-7- year- old children
                        in Mashhad in 2001. *Journal of Dentistry. Mashhad University of Medical Sciences*. 2006;29:235-242. DOI: 
67 Momeni A, Mardi M, Pieper K. Caries prevalence and treatment needs of 12-year-old children in
                        the Islamic Republic of Iran. *Med Princ Pract*. 2006;15:24-28. DOI: 
68 Toomarian L, Soury S, Farhadi H. Evaluation of DMFT index in 12- year - old students in Qom in
                        2004. *Beheshti Univ Dent J*. 2005;23:474-467. DOI: 
69 Vejdani J, Amiri M, Rezaie M. Prevalence of nursing caries and associating factors in 2-4
                        years old children. *J Gillan Univ Med Sci*. 2005;56:10-17. DOI: 
70 Daneshkazemi AR, Davari A. Assessment of DMFT and Enamel Hypoplasia among Junior High
                        School Children in Iran. *J Contemp Dent Pract*. 2005;6:85-92. DOI: 
71 Kazerouni K, Mohammadi N, Ansari Gh, Kamali Z. The effects of socio-economic status on dental caries incidence
                        in a group of primary school children, Tehran-2000. *Beheshti Univ Dent J*. 2005;22:51-59. DOI: 
72 Davari AR, Zare'shahi M, Mohammadi Y. The Survey of DMFT and Effective Factors in 12 Year Old Students
                        of Ardakan City in 2001 [In Persian]. *J Islam Soc Dentist*. 2004;5:70-79. DOI: 
73 Ramezani GH, Valaei N, Eikani H. Prevalence of DMFT and fluorosis in the students of Dayer city
                        (Iran). *J Indian SocPedodPrev Dent*. 2004;22:49-53. DOI: 
74 Ghandehari-Motlagh M, Zeraati H, Jamshidi Sh. Epidemiological study of dmft in children aged 3-5 years old of
                        Kindergartens under the supervision of the Welfare Organization of Tehran. *J Islamic Dent Association of Iran*. 2003;2:15-21. DOI: 
75 Ghandehari-Motlagh M, Mahboobi M. Assessment of DMFT and associating factors in 12 years old
                        children in Somesara city in 2002. *J Dent Med*. 2003;15:39-48. DOI: 
76 Sanei A, Moslemi M, Moslemi F, Zafarmand AH. Prevalence of caries free in 6-years-old children of Khomain
                        town. *Beheshti Univ Dent J*. 2003;21:344-352. DOI: 
77 Fani MM. Evaluation of DMFT Index in 11-16 Year- Old Children of Bavanat
                        in 2001. *J Shiraz Univ Med Sci*. 2003;4:23-30. DOI: 
78 Mortazavi M. The Prevalence of Fluorosis and DMFT Among 11-16 Years Old
                        School Children in Dayyer (Boshehr Province). *J Shiraz Dent Sch*. 2002;3:66-73. DOI: 
79 Memar N, Ghazi-Zadeh A, Mahmoudi Sh. Assessment of DMFT and associating factors in 12 years old
                        students in Sanandaj city in 1999. *J KordestanUniv Med Sci*. 2000;5:26-31. DOI: 
80 Eskandarizadeh A, Naderinejad MA. Determination of the caries free prevalence in 12 year-old
                        students in guidance schools in Sirjan City in 1996. *J Kerman Univ Med Sci*. 1999;6:222-228. DOI: 
81 Gholami Gh, Kazerouni K, Nouri M, Kamali Z. Oral health status in adolescents under the supervision of the
                        Welfare Organization of Tehran in 1996-97. *Pejouhandeh, Quarterly Research Journal*. 1998;8:121-132. DOI: 
82 . . *Islamic Republic of Iran, Ministry of Health and Medical Education, Oral
                        Health Bureau: Tehran; 1999. p.126-127*. ;:-. DOI: 
83 Bayat-Movahed S, Samadzadeh H, Ziyarati L, Memary N, Khosravi R, Sadr-Eshkevari PS. Oral health of Iranian children in 2004: a national pathfinder
                        survey of dental caries and treatment needs. *East Mediterr Health J*. 2011;17:243-249. DOI: 
84 Sadinejad M, Kelishadi R, Ardalan G, Taslimi M, Taheri M, Motlagh M. Evaluation of DMFT and dmft and gingival inflammation in Iranian
                        school students: Findings of a nationwide screening survey in urban and
                        rural areas. *J Isfahan Dent Sch*. 2014;10:154-162. DOI: 
85 Duangthip D, Gao SS, Lo EC, Chu CH. Early childhood caries among 5- to 6-year-old children in
                        Southeast Asia. *Int Dent J*. 2017;67:98-106. DOI: 
86 Khan SQ. Dental caries in Arab League countries: a systematic review and
                        meta-analysis. *Int Dent J*. 2014;64:-. DOI: 
87 Al Ayyan W, Al Halabi M, Hussein I, Khamis AH, Kowash M. A systematic review and meta-analysis of primary teeth caries
                        studies in Gulf Cooperation Council States. *Saudi Dent J*. 2018;30:175-182. DOI: 
88 Gimenez T, Bispo BA, Souza DP, Viganó ME, Wanderley MT, Mendes FM, et al. Does the decline in caries prevalence of latin American and
                        Caribbean children continue in the new century? Evidence from Systematic
                        Review with Meta-Analysis. *PLoS One*. 2016;11:e0164903-. DOI: 
89 Grund K, Goddon I, Schüler IM, Lehmann T, HeinrichWeltzien R. Clinical consequences of untreated dental caries in German 5-
                        and 8-year-olds. *BMC Oral Health*. 2015;15:140-. DOI: 
90 Tubert-Jeannin S, Riordan PJ, Manevy R, Lecuyer MM, Pegon-Machat E. Caries prevalence and fluoride use in low SES children in
                        Clermont-Ferrand (France). *Community Dent Health*. 2009;26:23-28. DOI: 
91 Pitts NB, Boyles J, Nugent ZJ, Thomas N, Pine CM. The dental caries experience of 5-year-old children in Great
                        Britain (2005/6). Surveys coordinated by the British Association for the
                        study of community dentistry. *Community Dent Health*. 2007;24:59-63. DOI: 
92 Dye B, Thornton-Evans G, Li X, Iafolla TJ. Dental caries and sealant prevalence in children and adolescents
                        in the United States, 2011–2012. *NCHS Data Brief*. 2015;191:1-8. DOI: 
93 . Children’s oral health report 2015. **. ;:-. DOI: 
94 Jadidfard MP, Yazdani S, Khoshnevisan MH, Monazzam KA. Study on the coverage of dental services by the armed forces
                        medical services insurance fund: a potential model for initial developments
                        of dental Insurance in Iran. *Journal Mil Med*. 2015;17:1-7. DOI: 
95 Nahvi M, Zarei E, Marzban S, Jahanmehr N. Utilization of dental services and its out-of-pocket payments: a
                        study in dental clinics of Ramsar. *Journal of Mashhad Dental School*. 2017;41:171-183. DOI: 
96 McDonagh MS, Whiting PF, Wilson PM, Sutton AJ, Chestnutt I, Cooper J, et al. Systematic review of water fluoridation. *BMJ*. 2000;321:855-859. DOI: 
97 Gómez Hortigüela L, Pérez Pariente J, García R, Chebude Y, Díaz I. Natural zeolites from Ethiopia for elimination of fluoride from
                        drinking water. *Sep Purif Technol*. 2013;120:224-229. DOI: 
98 Taghipour N, Amini H, Mosaferi M, Yunesian M, Pourakbar M, Taghipour H. National and sub-national drinking water fluoride concentrations
                        and prevalence of fluorosis and of decayed, missed, and filled teeth in Iran
                        from 1990 to 2015: a systematic review. *Environ Sci Pollut Res Int*. 2016;23:5077-5098. DOI: 
99 Lukacs JR, Largaespadal L. Explaining Sex Differences in Dental Caries Prevalence: Saliva,
                        Hormones and ‘‘Life-History’’ Etiologies. *American J of Human Biology*. 2006;18:540-555. DOI: 
100 Muller A, Kais H. Meta-analysis of teeth from European populations before and after
                        the 18th century reveals a shift towards increased prevalence of caries and
                        tooth loss. **. ;:-. DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2016.08.018
101 Chauhan D, Chauhan T, Sachdev V, Kirtaniya BC. A study of oral hygiene status and prevalence of gingival
                        diseases in 9 and 12-year-old school children of a northern hilly state,
                        India. *International Journal of Health&amp; Allied Sciences*. 2012;1:258-. DOI: 
102 Vadiakas G, Oulis CJ, Tsinidou K, Mamai-Homata E, Polychronopoulou A. Socio-behavioural factors influencing oral health of 12 and 15
                        year old Greek adolescents. A national pathfinder survey. *Eur Arch Paediatr Dent*. 2011;12:139-145. DOI: 
103 Ahn SH, Lee CH. Survey on the level of oral health and oral health care
                        attitudes and behavior of the interest in oral health education for
                        elementary school students. *Int J Clin Prev Dent*. 2015;11:207-216. DOI: 
104 Kumar S, Kumar A, Badiyani B, Kumar A, Basak D, Ismail MB. Oral health impact, dental caries experience, and associated
                        factors in 12-15-year-old school children in India. *Int J Adolesc Med Health*. 2017;29:-. DOI: 10.1515/ijamh-2015-0041
105 Heima M, Lee W, Milgrom P, Nelson S. Caregiver's education level and child's dental caries in African
                        Americans: a path analytic study. *Caries Res*. 2015;49:177-183. DOI: 
106 Saldūnaitė K, Bendoraitienė EA, Slabšinskienė E, Vasiliauskienė I, Andruškevičienė V, Zūbienė J. The role of parental education and socioeconomic status in
                        dental caries prevention among Lithuanian children. *Medicina (Kaunas)*. 2014;50:156-161. DOI: 
107 Jain M, Namdev R, Bodh M, Dutta S, Singhal P, Kumar A. Social and Behavioral Determinants for Early Childhood
                        Cariesamong Preschool Children in India. *J Dent Res Dent Clin Dent Prospects*. 2015;9:115-120. DOI: 
108 Schwendicke F, Dörfer CE, Schlattmann P, Foster Page L, Thomson WM, Paris S. Socioeconomic inequality and caries: a systematic review and
                        meta-analysis. *J Dent Res*. 2015;94:10-18. DOI: 
109 Jadidfard MP, Yazdani S, Khoshnevisan MH, Monazzam KA. Study on the coverage of dental services by the armed forces
                        medical services insurance fund: a potential model for initial developments
                        of dental Insurance in Iran. *Journal Mil Med*. 2015;17:1-7. DOI: 
110 Kumar S, Tadakamadla J, Johnson NW. Effect of Toothbrushing Frequency on Incidence and Increment of
                        Dental Caries: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. *J Dent Res*. 2016;95:1230-1236. DOI: 
111 Jürgensen N, Petersen PE. Oral health and the impact of socio-behavioural factors in a
                        cross sectional survey of 12-year old school children in Laos. *BMC Oral Health*. 2009;9:1-. DOI: 
112 Si Y, Guo Y, Yuan C, Xu T, Zheng SG. Comprehensive oral health care to reduce the incidence of severe
                        early childhood caries (s-ECC) in urban China. *The Chinese Journal of Dentis Research*. 2016;19:55-63. DOI: 
113 Becker T, Levin L, Shochat T, Einy S. How much does the DMFT index underestimate the need for
                        restorative care?. *J Dent Educ*. 2007;71:677-677. DOI: 
114 . Oral health surveys: basic methods: World Health Organization.
                        2013. **. ;:-. DOI: 
115 Jain SK, Pushpanjali K, Reddy SK, Gaikwad R, Deolia S. Comparison of different caries diagnostic thresholds under
                        epidemiological and clinical settings among 7-15 year old school children
                        from Bangalore city. *J Int Soc Prev Community Dent*. 2013;3:85-91. DOI: 
