# Association Analysis of Peripheral and CSF Biomarkers in Late Mild
                    Cognitive Impairment

**Authors:** Tao Zhang, Wei Kong, Shuaiqun Wang, Xiaoyang Mou

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 32903489
- Pmc: PMC7437457
- Doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00834

**Categories:**
- Genetics

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 12-8-2020
- Collection: 2020

## Abstract

Research shows that late mild cognitive impairment (LMCI) has a high risk of
                    turning into Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Due to the invasion of detection
                    methods and physical damage to the patients, it is not a convenient way to
                    diagnose and detect early AD and LMCI by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) data. So
                    there is an urgent need to find the correlation between peripheral biological
                    data and CSF data in the brain, and to find new diagnostic methods through
                    changes in the peripheral biological data. Studies have shown that during the
                    pathogenesis of LMCI and AD, peripheral immune cells specifically infiltrate
                    into the brain through the blood–brain barrier, causing an imbalance in
                    the brain’s immune response and dysregulating the clearance of
                    Aβ in CSF. Therefore, in this paper, canonical correlation analysis
                    (CCA) algorithm is presented to derive the correlation between peripheral and
                    CSF biomarkers based on LMCI peripheral gene expression data and plasma marker
                    information. Firstly, to explore the influence of the infiltration of peripheral
                    blood immune cells on the brain, the abundance of 28 immune cells were
                    calculated by using the gene set enrichment analysis algorithm of LMCI samples.
                    Then, to identify the correlation between biomarkers inside and outside of the
                    brain, we performed CCA to calculate the relationship between CSF and peripheral
                    biomarkers. Results of CCA showed significant correlations between the variable
                    sets of 8 peripheral biomarkers and the variable sets of CSF biomarkers (at
                    0.794). Finally, according to Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes and Gene
                    Ontology analysis, it was found that the obtained peripheral biomarkers are
                    involved in many immune-related pathways and functions which can be activated in
                    peripheral blood of LMCI patients. Most related genes enriched in immune-related
                    pathways and functions were up-regulated. Through receiver operating
                    characteristic curve (ROC) analysis, it was also found that FP40/FP42 and type 1
                    T helper can accurately predict the pathological changes of LMCI (at 0.747).

## Introduction

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage in which normal aging
                develops into dementia (Stephan et al., 2007),
                but it is also an unstable state. In the follow-up study of MCI patients, the
                abundance of MCI developing into Alzheimer’s disease (AD) increased year by
                year. It can be seen that MCI is an early warning signal for the onset of AD (Hansson et al., 2006; Jessen et al., 2014), and the risk of conversion of late
                mild cognitive impairment (LMCI) to AD is the highest.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) marker analysis is an effective method for diagnosing MCI
                could be a differentiating marker for the detection of prodromal AD from clinically
                diagnosed MCI patients (Park et al., 2019).
                However, due to the invasion of detection methods and physical damage to patients,
                it is not a convenient way to diagnose and detect early AD and LMCI by CSF. And the
                study of MCI in Magaki et al. (2007) found
                that the production of cytokines IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10 increased in peripheral
                blood, indicating that immune activation is an early phenomenon before AD. Changes
                in cytokines produced by PBMCs can be detected in MCI and can occur before clinical
                AD occurs. In the plasma marker study, plasma β amyloid has a certain
                relationship with β amyloid in the brain, and plasma Aβ measurement
                can be used as an effective marker to measure Aβ and tau (Risacher et al., 2019). Therefore, in this paper, the
                easy-to-measure peripheral blood gene data and plasma biomarkers are used to
                establish an association with CSF markers in the brain of LMCI patients.

To extract the correlation between biological features inside and outside the brain,
                feature information of biological signals inside and outside the brain needs to be
                extracted separately. For the calculation of immune cell abundance in peripheral
                blood, many new calculation methods can greatly enhance our investigation of immune
                cell subtypes. Among them, the CIBERSORT (Newman et
                al., 2015) and TIMER (Li et al., 2016)
                algorithms are based on deconvolution methods, inferring immune cells through gene
                expression profiling reference matrices and machine learning-based methods. However,
                these results are obtained from a mixture of simulated samples of different tissues
                (brain, heart, liver, lung, and tumor tissue), while in blood samples, it is
                difficult to distinguish (Novershtern et al., 2011
                ; Shoemaker et al., 2012). Bolen et al. (2011) proposed a computational method (from
                enrichment-related subset prediction, SPEC). The SPEC algorithm is based on gene set
                enrichment analysis (GSEA; Quesenberry and Colvin,
                2001; Subramanian et al., 2005), but
                it cannot distinguish subpopulations of immune cells in the tagged gene set used to
                measure immune cells. We obtained a new set of labeled genes through the article (Charoentong et al., 2017) and improved the SPEC
                algorithm. The advantage of this new algorithm is its robustness, which is
                insensitive to sample impurities and noise during preparation compared to
                deconvolution. And the subpopulation of immune cells can also be measured with high
                resolution.

Biological data sets in CSF can be used to diagnose diseases, but changes in a single
                indicator in the data set cannot measure the status of the disease. For peripheral
                biological indicators, a single biological indicator cannot accurately reflect
                physiological processes. Therefore, to find indicators that can reflect changes in
                CSF biomarker data in peripheral blood and more comprehensively reflect the
                physiological process of disease development, the canonical correlation analysis
                (CCA; Hotelling, 1992) algorithm is used in
                this paper to calculate the correlation between CSF data sets and peripheral
                biological data sets. Canonical correlation analysis is a multivariate statistical
                model that maximizes the correlation between the two composite variables (Kabir et al., 2014). There are more features in
                the peripheral data, including 28 types of peripheral blood immune cell abundance
                data and four types of plasma Aβ data. Canonical correlation analysis can
                more reliably measure the correlation between brain and peripheral biomarkers.

By analyzing the Pearson correlation between CSF data and peripheral data, we
                obtained that there were significant correlations between peripheral information
                (including six types of immune cells and two types of Aβ data) and CSF data.
                Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis found that FP40/FP42 (area
                under the ROC curve, 0.709) and type 1 T helper cell (area under the ROC curve,
                0.703) have clinical significance in the diagnosis of the disease. Receiver
                operating characteristic curve verification found that the combined diagnosis of two
                biomarkers further improved the accuracy (area under the ROC curve, 0.747). By
                constructing a protein–protein interaction (PPI) network (Szklarczyk et al., 2015) to find key genes, and
                performing Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
                analysis, the biological processes, and mechanism for the immune-related
                correlations between peripheral and CSF biomarkers were discovered.

## Materials and Methods

In this section, we describe the measurement of the abundance of peripheral blood
                immune cells in patients with LMCI and introduce three sources of data. The
                correlation was calculated and the biological reasons were analyzed.

## Data Sources and Preprocessing

Data used in this study were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease
                    Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; Weiner and
                    Veitch, 2015) database
                        1
                    . The
                    ADNI database was launched in 2003 as a public-private partnership, led by the
                    principal investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD. The ADNI participants have been
                    recruited from more than 50 sites across the United States and Canada. The
                    primary objective of the ADNI has been to test whether serial MRI, PET, other
                    biological markers, and clinical or neuropsychological assessment can be
                    combined to measure the progression of MCI and early AD. Alzheimer’s
                    Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database consists of three parts, including the
                    ADNI 1, the ADNI Grand Opportunities, and the ADNI 2. To date, these three
                    protocols have recruited more than 1500 adults (age range, 55–90 years)
                    to participate in the research, including CN older individuals, persons with
                    early or late MCI, and patients with early AD. The follow-up duration for each
                    study group was specified in the protocols for the ADNI 1, ADNI 2, and ADNI
                    Grand Opportunities. Regional ethics committees of all institutions approved of
                    the study. Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants.

Gene expression profiling from blood samples of ADNI participants was contributed
                    by Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) and performed at the BMS laboratories for 811 ADNI
                    participants from the ADNI WGS cohort. The Affymetrix Human Genome U219 Array
                    (Affymetrix
                        2
                    ,
                    Santa Clara, CA) was used for expression profiling. Peripheral blood samples
                    were collected using PAXgene tubes for RNA analysis. Blood RNA samples from 64
                    participants did not pass QC and were excluded from further processing. And we
                    identified three questionable subjects from the additional QC steps and removed
                    them. The data we finally downloaded was peripheral blood gene expression data
                    containing 744 samples. The plasma amyloid-beta (Aβ) biomarkers and CSF
                    biomarkers were also obtained from the ADNI database. The plasma Aβ
                    biomarkers contained 305 samples and the CSF biomarkers contained 1250 samples.
                    By screening out samples that existed in all three data and collected three
                    types of biological data in the same year (the samples with missing data were
                    deleted), 36 samples containing three biological data were obtained. The 36
                    samples were labeled with disease status by using the file “AD Challenge
                    Training Data: Clinical (Updated)” downloaded from the ADNI database.

Finally, the peripheral blood gene expression profile, peripheral blood
                    Aβ biomarkers, and CSF markers contained 36 samples from 20 patients
                    with LMCI and 16 control. The gene expression profile contained 49386 RNAs. The
                    plasma Aβ contained Aβ40 and Aβ42 free in plasma (FP40,
                    FP42), Aβ40, and Aβ42 total in plasma (TP40, TP42). We analyzed
                    two ratios, free plasma Aβ42 to free Aβ40 (FP40: FP42) and total
                    plasma Aβ42 to total Aβ40 (TP40: TP42), as they had been
                    previously shown to correlate with amyloid positivity (Perez-Grijalba et al., 2013, 2019; Fandos et al.,
                    2017; de Rojas et al., 2018). The
                    CSF biomarkers contained Aβ, tau protein (TAU), and phosphorylated tau
                    protein (PTAU).

## Immune Cell Abundance Calculation

In this study, GSEA was applied to calculate the relative abundance of immune
                    cells in peripheral blood. As described in Subramanian
                    et al. (2005) GSEA considers experiments with genomewide expression
                    profiles from samples belonging to two classes, labeled 1 or 2. Genes are ranked
                    based on the correlation between their expression and the class distinction by
                    using any suitable metric. Given an a priori defined set of
                    genes S (e.g., genes encoding products in a metabolic pathway, located in the
                    same cytogenetic band, or sharing the same GO category), the goal of GSEA is to
                    determine whether the members of S are randomly distributed throughout L or
                    primarily found at the top or bottom. We calculate an enrichment score (ES) that
                    reflects the degree to which a set S is overrepresented at the extremes (top or
                    bottom) of the entire ranked list L. The score is calculated by walking down the
                    list L, increasing a running-sum statistic when we encounter a gene in S and
                    decreasing it when we encounter genes, not in S. The magnitude of the increment
                    depends on the correlation of the gene with the phenotype. The ES is the maximum
                    deviation from zero encountered in the random walk. Tag gene sets of 28 immune
                    cells were obtained from Charoentong et al.
                    (2017), as a priori defined set of genes S. The code for
                    calculating the ES of the custom prior defined set of genes S was obtained from Bolen et al. (2011) (SPEC). We have improved
                    SPEC by replacing the tag gene sets of eight immune cells in the SPEC
                    calculation code with the tag gene sets of 28 immune cells. Download normal and
                    patient peripheral blood gene expression data from the ADNI database, and then
                    GSEA was used to calculate the ESs of 28 immune cell signature genes in the
                    normal and patient sample gene expression data. The ES is the relative abundance
                    of the immune cells in the sample.

## Canonical Correlation Analysis

Canonical correlation analysis is a suitable technique that can establish
                    interrelation between two sets of variables as well as quantify the percentage
                    of variance common to the two sets (Ventura et
                    al., 2011; Kim et al., 2017).
                    Canonical correlation analysis indicates a correlation between two linear
                    combinations of sets of dependent and independent variables as linear
                    combinations of variables useful for predictive or comparative purposes (Akbas and Takma, 2005; Cankaya and Kayaalp, 2007; Sahin et al., 2011). Therefore, the goal of CCA is to
                    find the best linear combination between two multivariate datasets that can
                    maximize the correlation coefficient between them (Malacarne, 2014). Linear combinations of original
                    variables can be defined by canonical variates (Ui and Vi) as follows:

The correlation between Ui and Vi can be defined as canonical correlation.
                    Canonical correlation analysis is repeatedly looking coefficients a and b to
                    maximize the correlation between Ui and Vi. The maximum number of canonical
                    functions that can be extracted equals to the number of variables in the
                    smallest canonical variate (Dattalo, 2014)
                    which is 3 in this study. The first canonical function is derived to maximize
                    the correlation between Ui and Vi variables (Laessig
                    and Duckett, 1979).

Standardized canonical coefficients and loadings were used to evaluate the
                    relative importance of variables in the model (Dattalo,
                    2014). Standardized coefficients are interpreted similarly to
                    standardized regression coefficients in multiple regressions. Therefore, CCA is
                    used to estimate canonical coefficients (ai1, ai2, …, aip and bi1, bi2,
                    …, biq) when the canonical correlation is at the maximum (Akbas and Takma, 2005). Canonical loading reflects
                    the variance that the observed variable can be shared with canonical variate and
                    interpreted like a factor loading in assessing the relative contribution of each
                    variable to each canonical function (Safari et
                    al., 2013). The result of canonical loading shows the contribution degree
                    of the variable to the variable set. Redundancy index (RI) is proposed to
                    calculate each canonical correlation to determine how much of the variance in
                    one set of variables is accounted by the other set of variables (Sharma, 1996; Safari
                    et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2017).
                    The CCA can use a small number of features to analyze the correlation between
                    the two sets of variables (CSF and peripheral biomarkers). The software SPSS
                    25.0 for Windows was used for statistical analysis of the data.

## Results

## Immune Cells Abundance Measurement

The computational method GSEA was applied to estimate the abundance of 28 kinds
                    of peripheral blood immune cells including 15 kinds of adaptive immune cells and
                    13 kinds of innate immune cells: activated B cell, immature B cell, memory B
                    cell, activated CD4 T cell, activated CD8 T cell, central memory CD4 T cell,
                    central memory CD8 T cell, effector memory CD4 T cell, effector memory CD8 T
                    cell, gamma delta T cell, regulatory T cell, T follicular helper cell, type 1 T
                    helper cell, type 17 T helper cell, type 2 T helper cell, plasmacytoid,
                    activated dendritic cell, immature dendritic cell, natural killer cell, natural
                    killer T cell, CD56 dim natural killer cell, CD56 bright natural killer cell,
                    eosinophil, macrophage, mast cell, MDSC, natural, and neutrophil. These 28 kinds
                    of immune cells include most types of lymphocytes which produce important
                    cytokines. The abundance of the 28 peripheral blood immune cells for LMCI and
                    normal samples inferred by GSEA were shown in Figure
                    1.

From Figure 1 we can see, compared with
                    normal samples, the activated CD4 T cell, activated B cell, central memory CD8 T
                    cell, effector memory CD4 T cell, effector memory CD8 T cell, immature B cell,
                    regulatory T cell, T follicular helper cell, type 1 T helper cell, activated
                    dendritic cell, mast cell, MDSC, natural killer T cell appear to be in lower
                    abundance in LMCI samples. However, gamma delta T cell, memory B cell, type 17 T
                    helper cell, type 2 T helper cell, CD56bright natural killer cell, CD56dim
                    natural killer cell, eosinophil, immature dendritic cell, macrophage, monocyte,
                    natural killer cell, neutrophil were increased in LMCI samples.

## Results of Correlation Analysis

At first, to explore the relationship between LMCI and AD, we select proper
                    biomarkers by comparing the changes of CSF biomarkers in LMCI with AD relative
                    to their normal samples respectively (see Supplementary Figure 1).
                    From the Supplementary Figure
                    1A to Supplementary
                    Figure 1C, we can see that compared with the normal samples, the levels
                    of Aβ are lower, and the levels of TAU and PTAU are higher in the CSF of
                    LMCI. From the Supplementary
                    Figure 1D to Supplementary
                    Figure 1F, the changes in the levels of Aβ, TAU, and PTAU in AD
                    are in the same situation. These results are consistent with the literature in Magaki et al. (2007), McKhann et al. (2011), Dubois et al. (2014) which found that Aβ has
                    a lower level, and TAU and PTAU have a higher level in AD. We can suggest that
                    the LMCI sample has a very high risk of developing AD. Therefore, we selected
                    Aβ, TAU, and PTAU data at baseline as the significant biomarkers of the
                    CSF of LMCI.

Not all peripheral biomarkers are related to CSF biomarkers. To evaluate the
                    correlation between CSF and peripheral biomarkers, the Pearson correlation
                    coefficient (Pearson, 1920) was
                    calculated between CSF and peripheral biomarkers, including three variables in
                    the CSF biomarkers and 34 variables in the peripheral biomarkers. The Pearson
                    correlation coefficients of CSF and peripheral marker variables are shown in Table 1.

The level of statistical significance was set at α = 0.05. From the Table 1 we can see 8 peripheral biomarkers
                    were significantly associated with CSF biomarkers under significant conditions.
                    The Pearson correlation coefficient between T follicular helper cell and
                    Aβ was −0.408 (α = 0.014 < 0.05); the Pearson
                    correlation coefficient between gamma delta T cell and PTAU was −0.332
                    (α = 0.048 < 0.05); the Pearson correlation coefficient between
                    immature B cell and TAU was −0.350 (α = 0.036 < 0.05);
                    the Pearson correlation coefficient between regulatory T cell and TAU was
                    −0.373 (α = 0.025 < 0.05); the Pearson correlation
                    coefficient between regulatory T cell and PTAU was −0.372 (α =
                    0.025 < 0.05); the Pearson correlation coefficient between type 1 T
                    helper cell and PTAU was −0.401 (α = 0.015 < 0.05); the
                    Pearson correlation coefficient between TP40 and TAU was −0.376
                    (α = 0.024 < 0.05); Pearson correlation coefficient of FP40/FP42
                    and PTAU was 0.346 (α = 0.038 < 0.05). The levels of 8
                    peripheral biomarkers in LMCI and normal samples are shown in Figure 2.

Compared with the normal samples, we can see from Figure
                    2 that the abundances of gamma delta T cell increased slightly; the
                    abundance of immature B cell, regulatory T cell, T follicular cell, and TP40
                    decreased slightly; the abundance of CD56 bright natural killer cell and
                    FP40/FP42 increased significantly; type 1 T helper cell abundance reduced
                    significantly.

Bivariate correlations among variables of CSF biomarkers and variables of
                    peripheral biomarkers are shown in Table 1.
                    Results showed correlations between variable sets of Aβ, TAU, or PTAU
                    (CSF biomarkers) and variable sets of gamma delta T cell, immature B cell,
                    regulatory T cell, T follicular cell, type 1 T helper cell, CD56bright natural
                    killer cell, TP40, or FP40/FP42(8 of the peripheral biomarkers). As we know that
                    MCI was a complicated brain disease and the occurrence of MCI was accompanied by
                    changes in the levels of multiple CSF biomarkers. One CSF biomarker cannot
                    accurately determine the occurrence of disease. Since the Pearson correlation
                    only could explain the correlation between two variables, it is impossible to
                    simultaneously discover the relationship between the variable set of CSF and
                    peripheral biomarkers. Base on that, in this study, CCA was introduced to
                    explain the relationship between CSF biomarkers and peripheral biomarkers. Table 2 shows direct results for the
                    correlation between the two variable sets, which presented the canonical
                    correlation coefficients and the significance of the research.



Standardized canonical coefficients for pairs of all canonical variables [Ui and
                    Vi in formula (1) and (2)] were shown in Table 3.
                    Canonical variates representing optimal linear combinations of dependent and
                    independent variables were defined by C1. Standardized canonical coefficients of
                    Aβ (0.435 in C1 and −0.493 in C2), TAU (0.867 in C1 and
                    −0.886 in C2), and PTAU (0.339 in C1 and 1.062 in C2) as variables of
                    CSF biomarkers suggested that they contributed importantly to the first and
                    second canonical variate (U1, U2). On the other hand, the first standardized
                    canonical coefficients of immature B cell, regulatory T cell, CD56 bright
                    natural killer cell, gamma delta T cell, TP40 as variables of peripheral
                    biomarkers were −0.392, −0.585, 0.514, −0.423, and
                    −0.456, respectively, indicating that they contributed importantly to
                    the first canonical variate (V1). The second standardized canonical coefficients
                    of FP40/FP42(0.61), T follicular helper cell (0.641), type 1 T helper cell
                    (−0.390), gamma delta T cell (−0.580), and TP40 (0.340)
                    contributed importantly to the second canonical variate (V2).

To find out the key factors in each group of variables, we presented the loadings
                    for the canonical function in Table 4.
                    Canonical loading presents a product-moment correlation between the original
                    variable and its corresponding canonical variate. These values reflect the
                    degree of a variable to be represented by a canonical variate. Canonical
                    loadings for variables of CSF biomarkers suggested that TAU (0.905) and PTAU
                    (0.723) had more effect than Aβ (0.07) to form the first fair for
                    variables of CSF biomarkers (U1). In the second fair for variables of CSF
                    biomarkers (U2), Aβ (−0.561) and PTAU (0.691) were more
                    important factors. On the other hand, canonical loadings for regulatory T cell
                    (−0.595), CD56bright natural killer cell (0.565), TP40 (−0.525),
                    type 1 T helper cell (−0.370), immature B cell (−0.366), and
                    FP40/FP42 (0.290) had stronger effects compared to other factors to form the
                    first fair for variables of peripheral biomarkers (V1). And the FP40/FP42
                    (0.351), T follicular helper cell (0.305), type 1 T helper cell, CD56bright
                    natural killer cell (−0.326), and gamma delta T (−0.538) cell
                    were more important factors to form the second fair for variables of peripheral
                    biomarkers (V2).

Numbers of dimensions explaining the relationships between variable sets were
                    reduced from 11 to 2 by CCA. These results indicated a high correlation between
                    the set of CSF biomarkers (U1) and the set of peripheral biomarkers (V1) (at
                    0.794). Cross loadings represent correlations between original variables and
                    opposite canonical variables. According to cross-loading results, the first pair
                    of canonical variables TAU (0.718) and PTAU (0.574) provided a relatively strong
                    contribution to canonical variate V1 whereas regulatory T cell (−0.472),
                    CD56bright natural killer cell (0.448), TP40 (−0.417), type 1 T helper
                    cell (−0.294), immature B cell (−0.291), and FP40/FP42 (0.230)
                    highly contributed to U1 (Table 5). The
                    second pair of canonical variables Aβ (−0.398) and PTAU (0.49)
                    provided a greater contribution to canonical variate V2 whereas FP40/FP42
                    (0.249), T follicular helper cell (0.216), type 1 T helper cell
                    (−0.279), CD56bright natural killer cell (−0.231), and gamma
                    delta T cell made an important contribution to U2 (Table 5).

## ROC Analysis

To verify the practical significance of the correlation between CSF and
                        peripheral biomarkers, we conducted the ROC analysis. Through CCA analysis,
                        variables with a significant correlation between CSF and peripheral
                        biomarkers were found. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis by
                        using the peripheral biomarkers (type 1 T helper cell, CD56bright natural
                        killer cell, and FP40F/P42 highly contributed to U1 and U2) which highly
                        contributed to V1 and V2 was performed to find peripheral biological
                        indicators with clinical significance for disease classification. Then
                        multiple peripheral biomarkers were used for logistic regression, and ROC
                        analysis of multi-index combined classification was performed. We used SPSS
                        software to draw the ROC curve. The results of the ROC analysis were shown
                        in Figure 3.

Through the ROC analysis, we found that FP40/FP42 (area under the ROC curve,
                        0.709) and type 1 T helper cell (area under the ROC curve, 0.703) had
                        clinical significance for the diagnosis of the disease (Figures 3A,B). Logistic regression was performed by
                        using two indicators (set the coefficient significance to p
                        < 0.1). The coefficients of FP40F/FP42 (p = 0.046
                        < 0.1) and type 1 T helper cell (p = 0.093
                        < 0.1) satisfy the significance. The ROC analysis of the combined
                        diagnosis of the two indicators showed that the combined diagnosis further
                        improved accuracy (the area under the ROC curve, 0.747) (Figure 3C).

## Reconstruction of the PPI Network

The immune-related PPI network was constructed to explore the biological
                    significance of the correlation between CSF and peripheral biomarkers. For the
                    differential analysis of the microarray data used to calculate the abundance of
                    immune cells, differential RNA extraction was performed by using the Limma
                    algorithm. We chose p-value < 0.05 as the threshold for
                    screening differentially expressed genes. This process is implemented using the
                    R package ‘Limma’ (Ritchie et
                    al., 2015). A total of 1324 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
                    identified, of which 801 were up-regulated and 523 were down-regulated in LMCI.
                    For all the differentially expressed genes, we constructed the PPI network by
                    using the STRING database
                        3
                    . The
                    final DEGs PPI network was constructed with 1050 gene nodes and 4547 edges
                    through the STRING v10 data database.

Protein–protein interaction network related to the abundances of immune
                    cells was constructed by retaining genes related to immunity and node genes
                    directly linked to them. In the correlation analysis, six immune cells were
                    significantly correlated with CSF biomarkers. 1324 differentially expressed
                    genes were matched with the tag genes of 6 immune cells, and 26 immune-related
                    differentially expressed genes were obtained. We used 26 immune-related
                    differentially expressed genes to search in the constructed PPI network and
                    found that 1 gene does not exist in the PPI network and 1 gene is an isolated
                    node. Finally, 2 genes were deleted and 24 immune-related differentially
                    expressed genes were retained. In the PPI network, 24 immune-related
                    differentially expressed genes and gene nodes directly connected to them were
                    selected, the immune-related PPI network was constructed by 223 gene nodes and
                    1123 edges finally. The visualization of the immune-related PPI network was
                    built using Cytoscape v3.6.0 software (Shannon
                    et al., 2003) (Figure 4).

Then the 223 significant genes were analyzed by DAVID for GO and KEGG, and we
                    investigated the role of these genes in biological functions and processes (see Figure 5). The GO and KEGG analysis used the
                    online database DAVID v6.8 (Sherman and
                    Lempicki, 2009), and visual display through R software (R Core Team, 2013).

The results of the enrichment analysis showed that these genes were related to
                    the inflammatory response and had a certain relationship with the expression of
                    some cytokines. In the reconstructed PPI network, most genes were up-regulated
                    (a total of 223 genes, 157 genes were significantly up-regulated and 68 genes
                    were significantly down-regulated). Among the 24 immune-related genes, 19 genes
                    were significantly up-regulated and 5 genes were down-regulated. It shows that
                    LMCI is closely related to the systemic inflammatory response. LMCI may show
                    similar physiological processes as AD, such as the recruitment of peripheral
                    immune cells to the brain, and the permeability of blood–brain barrier
                    (BBB). It may be the biological reason for the significant correlation between
                    the LMCI peripheral data and the CSF data.

## Discussion

MCI is a chronic degenerative disease of the nervous system, which refers to a state
                of cognitive impairment between normal aging and dementia. It appears that memory
                loss is not commensurate with age, but it has not yet reached the standard of AD.
                However, patients diagnosed with MCI are at high risk of developing AD. The AD
                conversion rate is 6–25% per year. In the AD research, many clinical cases
                have shown that the treatment effect is not good in the middle and advanced stages,
                so researchers have turned their attention to its early diagnosis and preventive
                intervention in recent years. There is evidence that peripheral immune cells in AD
                recognize Aβ and treat it, present it to T cells, and trigger adaptive
                immunity (Jóźwik et al., 2012
                ; Begum et al., 2014). This indicates that
                peripheral biomarkers may be potentially associated with AD. The CSF biomarker
                changes in LMCI patients are very similar to those in AD, so the study of LMCI
                patients is of great significance for early detection and early intervention of AD.
                CCA was introduced to explain the relationship between CSF biomarkers and peripheral
                biomarkers. The results indicated a high correlation between variable sets of CSF
                biomarkers and variable sets of peripheral biomarkers. It may be due to Aβ
                transported to the periphery and activated adaptive immunity. Receiver operating
                characteristic curve analysis found that the diagnostic accuracy of two of the
                peripheral biomarkers (FP40/FP42 and type 1 T helper cell) for the disease was
                0.747. It was found that the systemic immune response plays an important role in the
                correlation between peripheral biomarkers and CSF biomarkers through KEGG and GO
                analysis.

About 223 differentially expressed genes related to immunity were used for KEGG and
                GO analysis. It was found that these genes are closely related to the IL-6 signaling
                pathway, TNF signaling pathway, IFN-γ signaling pathway,
                γ-interferon- mediated signaling pathways, tumor necrosis factor-mediated
                signaling pathway, chemokine signal pathway, inflammatory response function, immune
                response function, and so on. From the biological analysis we can see that these
                pathways and functions in KEGG and GO results are related to immunity, inflammation,
                and cytokines. We also found other biological processes related to the immune
                response, such as positive and negative regulation of inflammatory response
                function, type I interferon signaling pathway, tumor necrosis factor-activated
                receptor activity function, positive regulation of tumor necrosis factor production
                function, regulation of γ-interferon-mediated signaling pathway. Most genes
                enriched in these pathways and functions are up-regulated.

The further molecular biological analysis shows that the expression of Aβ in
                CSF and peripheral is closely related. It has been found in AD studies that
                Aβ enters peripheral blood to trigger an inflammatory response. PBMCs from
                AD patients are induced to release pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, TNF, and
                IFN-γ (Pellicano et al., 2010). It
                further promoted the production of amyloid precursor protein and enzymes that cleave
                it, leading to increased Aβ production (Sutinen
                et al., 2012). Aβ can also stimulate the pro-inflammatory
                NF-κB dependent signaling pathway (Kumar et
                al., 2014). Through regulated transport, peripheral inflammatory markers can
                cross the BBB and perform neuromodulation (Banks,
                2005). INF-γ stimulated the release of CXCL-10, and INF also
                increased. In AD, CXCL-10 has been found to bind to the chemokine receptor CXC
                chemokine receptor 3, which is involved in T cell initiation and maintenance of
                natural killer cells in the body, thereby inducing extracellular signal-regulated
                kinases Pathways eventually lead to neuronal dysfunction and apoptosis (Nelson and Gruol, 2004; Sui et al., 2006; Cho et
                al., 2009). Compared with normal samples, the concentrations of peripheral
                blood cytokines IL-2, IL-6, and epidermal growth factor (EGF) in AD patients were
                significantly increased (Lai et al., 2017).
                Physiological changes including inflammatory responses and changes in cytokines were
                found in AD. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes and GO analysis of
                differentially expressed genes in this study also found similar physiological
                changes in pathways and functions in LMCI patients. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
                Genomes and GO analysis of differentially expressed genes in peripheral blood of
                LMCI patients revealed that most of the genes enriched in cytokine-related signaling
                pathways were up-regulated. Aβ clearance in the brain mainly depends on
                peripheral clearance to achieve local lymph node degradation. In LMCI, Aβ in
                the brain is transported to the peripheral blood and releases pro-inflammatory
                cytokines, activating immune-related pathways and functions. This indicates that
                patients with LMCI have shown a systemic inflammatory response similar to AD
                patients. These results show that peripheral biomarkers can reflect the pathological
                changes of LMCI in the brain. Peripheral biomarkers may develop new diagnostic
                methods for LMCI. The research on LMCI will also help to predict AD at an early
                stage, and also provide an important basis for AD immunotherapy.

## Data Availability Statement

Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. This data can be found at
                ADNI datasets: 
                https://ida.loni.usc.edu/pages/access/studyData.jsp; 
                https://ida.loni.usc.edu/pages/access/geneticData.jsp.

## Ethics Statement

Written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s) for the publication of
                any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.

## Author Contributions

WK and TZ conceived the study, participated in its design and coordination, and
                performed all the molecular biological analyses of the data. TZ carried out the GSEA
                studies on the LMCI’s gene expression data and drafted the manuscript. SW
                and TZ performed the pre-processing, GSEA, CCA algorithms, and some statistical
                analysis of LMCI expression data and plasma marker data. WK helped with data
                interpretation and manuscript drafting. XM participated in the final data analysis
                and interpretation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Conflict of Interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial
                or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
                interest.

**Keywords:**
peripheral and CSF biomarkers, blood–brain barrier, late mild cognitive impairment (LMCI), gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), canonical correlation analysis (CCA), receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC)

**Funding Sources:**
  - Award ID: 18ZR1417200
  - Award ID: 61803257

## References

1. Akbas Y., Takma C. H.. Canonical correlation analysis for studying
                    the relationship between egg production traits and body weight, egg weight and
                    age at sexual maturity in layers.. *Czech J. Anim. Sci.*. 2005;50:163-168. DOI: 10.17221/4010-CJAS.
2. Banks W. A.. Blood-brain barrier transport of cytokines:
                    a mechanism for neuropathology.. *Curr. Pharm. Des*. 2005;11:973-984. DOI: 10.2174/1381612053381684. PMID: 15777248.
3. Begum A. N., Cunha C., Sidhu H., Alkam T., Scolnick J., Rosario E. R.. Women
                    with the Alzheimer’s risk marker ApoE4 lose Aβ-specific CD4+ T
                    cells 10–20 years before men.. *Trans. Psychiatry*. 2014;4:-. DOI: 10.1038/tp.2014.51. PMID: 25072319.
4. Bolen C. R., Uduman M., Kleinstein S. H.. Cell subset prediction for blood genomic
                    studies.. *BMC Bioinformatics*. 2011;12:-. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-258. PMID: 21702940.
5. Cankaya S., Kayaalp G. T.. Estimation of relationship between live
                    weights and some body measurements in German farm x hair crossbred by canonical
                    correlation analysis.. *Hayvansal Üretim*. 2007;48:27-32.
6. Charoentong P., Finotello F., Angelova M., Mayer C., Efremova M., Rieder D.. Pan-cancer
                    immunogenomic analyses reveal genotype-immunophenotype relationships and
                    predictors of response to checkpoint blockade.. *Cell Rep.*. 2017;18:248-262. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.019. PMID: 28052254.
7. Cho J., Nelson T. E., Bajova H., Gruol D. L.. Chronic CXCL10 alters neuronal properties in
                    rat hippocampal culture.. *J. Neuroimmunol.*. 2009;207:92-100. DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.12.007. PMID: 19167097.
8. Dattalo P. V.. . *A Demonstration of Canonical Correlation Analysis with Orthogonal
                    Rotation to Facilitate Interpretation.*. 2014;:3-5.
9. de Rojas I., Romero J., Rodriguez-Gomez O., Pesini P., Sanabria A., Perez-Cordon A.. Correlations
                    between plasma and PET beta-amyloid levels in individuals with subjective
                    cognitive decline: the Fundacio ACE healthy brain initiative (FACEHBI).. *Alzheimer’s Res. Ther.*. 2018;10:-. DOI: 10.1186/s13195-018-0444-1. PMID: 30497535.
10. Dubois B., Feldman H. H., Jacova C., Hampel H., Molinuevo J. L., Blennow K.. Advancing
                    research diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease: the IWG-2
                    criteria.. *Lancet Neurol.*. 2014;13:614-629. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70090-0. PMID: 24849862.
11. Fandos N., Pérez-Grijalba V., Pesini P., Olmos S., Bossa M., Villemagne V. L.. Plasma
                    amyloid β 42/40 ratios as biomarkers for amyloid β cerebral
                    deposition in cognitively normal individuals.. *Alzheimer’s Dement.*. 2017;8:179-187. DOI: 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.07.004. PMID: 28948206.
12. Hansson O., Zetterberg H., Buchhave P., Londos E., Blennow K., Minthon L.. Association between CSF biomarkers and
                    incipient Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive
                    impairment: a follow-up study.. *Lancet Neurol.*. 2006;5:228-234. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70355-6. PMID: 16488378.
13. Hotelling H.. Relations between two sets of
                    variates. *Breakthroughs in Statistics*. 1992;:162-190. DOI: 10.2307/2333955.
14. Jessen F., Wolfsgruber S., Wiese B., Bickel H., Mösch E., Kaduszkiewicz H.. AD
                    dementia risk in late MCI, in early MCI, and in subjective memory impairment.. *Alzheimer’s Dement.*. 2014;10:76-83. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.09.017. PMID: 23375567.
15. Jóźwik A., Landowski J., Bidzan L., Fülop T., Bryl E., Witkowski J. M.. Beta-amyloid peptides enhance the
                    proliferative response of activated CD4+ CD28+ lymphocytes from Alzheimer
                    disease patients and from healthy elderly.. *PLoS One*. 2012;7:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033276. PMID: 22428008.
16. Kabir A., Merrill R. D., Shamim A. A., Klemn R. D., Labrique A. B., Christian P.. Canonical
                    correlation analysis of infant’s size at birth and maternal factors: a
                    study in rural Northwest Bangladesh.. *PLoS One*. 2014;9:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094243. PMID: 24710082.
17. Kim T. W., Kim I. S., Kwon S. G., Hwang J. H., Park D. H., Kang D. G.. Identification
                    of relationship between pork colour and physicochemical traits in American
                    Berkshire by canonical correlation analyses.. *Anim. Product. Sci.*. 2017;57:1179-1185. DOI: 10.1071/an14975.
18. Kumar A., Pate K. M., Moss M. A., Dean D. N., Rangachari V.. Self-propagative replication of Aβ
                    oligomers suggests potential transmissibility in Alzheimer disease.. *PLoS One*. 2014;9:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111492. PMID: 25365422.
19. Laessig R. E., Duckett E. J.. Canonical correlation analysis: potential
                    for environmental health planning.. *Am. J. Public Health*. 1979;69:353-359. DOI: 10.2105/AJPH.69.4.353. PMID: 426161.
20. Lai K. S. P., Liu C. S., Rau A., Lanctôt K. L., Köhler C. A., Pakosh M.. Peripheral
                    inflammatory markers in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and
                    meta-analysis of 175 studies.. *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry*. 2017;88:876-882. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2017-316201. PMID: 28794151.
21. Li B., Severson E., Pignon J. C., Zhao H., Li T., Novak J.. Comprehensive
                    analyses of tumor immunity: implications for cancer immunotherapy.. *Genome Biol.*. 2016;17:1-16. DOI: 10.1186/s13059-016-1028-7. PMID: 26753840.
22. Magaki S., Mueller C., Dickson C., Kirsch W.. Increased production of inflammatory
                    cytokines in mild cognitive impairment.. *Exp. Gerontol.*. 2007;42:233-240. DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2006.09.015. PMID: 17085001.
23. Malacarne R. L.. Canonical correlation analysis.. *Math. J.*. 2014;16:1-22.
24. McKhann G. M., Knopman D. S., Chertkow H., Hyman B. T., Jack C. R., Kawas C. H.. The
                    diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from
                    the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on
                    diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease.. *Alzheimer’s Dement.*. 2011;7:263-269. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005. PMID: 21514250.
25. Nelson T. E., Gruol D. L.. The chemokine CXCL10 modulates excitatory
                    activity and intracellular calcium signaling in cultured hippocampal neurons.. *J. Neuroimmunol.*. 2004;156:74-87. DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2004.07.009. PMID: 15465598.
26. Newman A. M., Liu C. L., Green M. R., Gentles A. J., Feng W., Xu Y.. Robust
                    enumeration of cell subsets from tissue expression profiles.. *Nat. Methods*. 2015;12:453-457. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3337. PMID: 25822800.
27. Novershtern N., Subramanian A., Lawton L. N., Mak R. H., Haining W. N., McConkey M. E.. Densely
                    interconnected transcriptional circuits control cell states in human
                    hematopoiesis.. *Cell*. 2011;144:296-309. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.004. PMID: 21241896.
28. Park J. E., Choi K. Y., Kim B. C., Choi S. M., Song M. K., Lee J. J.. Cerebrospinal
                    fluid biomarkers for the diagnosis of prodromal Alzheimer’s disease in
                    amnestic mild cognitive impairment.. *Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. Extra*. 2019;9:100-113. DOI: 10.1159/000496920. PMID: 31011328.
29. Pearson K.. Notes on the history of correlation.. *Biometrika*. 1920;13:25-45. DOI: 10.2307/2331722.
30. Pellicano M., Bulati M., Buffa S., Barbagallo M., Di Prima A., Misiano G.. Systemic
                    immune responses in Alzheimer’s disease: in vitro mononuclear cell
                    activation and cytokine production.. *J. Alzheimer’s Dis.*. 2010;21:181-192. DOI: 10.3233/jad-2010-091714. PMID: 20413861.
31. Perez-Grijalba V., Pesini P., Monleon I., Boada M., Tárraga L., Ruiz-Laza A.. Several
                    direct and calculated biomarkers from the amyloid-β pool in blood are
                    associated with an increased likelihood of suffering from mild cognitive
                    impairment.. *J. Alzheimer’s Dis.*. 2013;36:211-219. DOI: 10.3233/JAD-121744. PMID: 23635404.
32. Perez-Grijalba V., Romero J., Pesini P., Sarasa L., Monleon I., San-Jose I.. Plasma
                    Aβ42/40 ratio detects early stages of Alzheimer’s disease and
                    correlates with CSF and neuroimaging biomarkers in the AB255 study.. *J. Prevent. Alzheimer’s Dis.*. 2019;6:34-41. DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2018.41. PMID: 30569084.
33. Quesenberry P. J., Colvin G. A.. Hematopoietic stem cells, progenitor cells,
                    and cytokines.. *Williams Hematol.*. 2001;338:153-174.
34. Risacher S. L., Fandos N., Romero J., Sherriff I., Pesini P., Saykin A. J.. Plasma
                    amyloid beta levels are associated with cerebral amyloid and tau deposition.. *Alzheimer’s Dement.*. 2019;11:510-519. DOI: 10.1016/j.dadm.2019.05.007. PMID: 31384662.
35. Ritchie M. E., Phipson B., Wu D. I., Hu Y., Law C. W., Shi W.. limma
                    powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray
                    studies.. *Nucleic Acids Res.*. 2015;43:-. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv007. PMID: 25605792.
36. Safari P., Danyali S. F., Honarnejad R., Esfahani M.. Study of relationship between oil quality
                    traits with agro-morphological traits in peanut genotypes by canonical
                    correlation analysis.. *Int. J. Biosci.*. 2013;3:1-10. DOI: 10.12692/ijb/3.8.1-10.
37. Sahin M., Cankaya S., Ceyhan A.. Canonical correlation analysis for
                    estimation of relationships between some traits measured at weaning time and
                    six-month age in merino lambs.. *Bulgarian J. Agricult. Sci.*. 2011;17:680-686.
38. Shannon P., Markiel A., Ozier O., Baliga N. S., Wang J. T., Ramage D.. Cytoscape:
                    a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction
                    networks.. *Genome Res.*. 2003;13:2498-2504. DOI: 10.1101/gr.1239303. PMID: 14597658.
39. Sharma S.. . *Applied Multivariate Techniques.*. 1996;:391-404.
40. Sherman B. T., Lempicki R. A.. Systematic and integrative analysis of large
                    gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources.. *Nat. Protoc.*. 2009;4:-. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2008.211. PMID: 19131956.
41. Shoemaker J. E., Lopes T. J., Ghosh S., Matsuoka Y., Kawaoka Y., Kitano H.. CTen: a web-based platform for identifying
                    enriched cell types from heterogeneous microarray data.. *BMC Genomics*. 2012;13:-. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-460. PMID: 22953731.
42. Stephan B. C., Matthews F. E., McKeith I. G., Bond J., Brayne C.. Early cognitive change in the general
                    population: how do different definitions work?. *J. Am. Geriatr. Soc.*. 2007;55:1534-1540. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01386.x. PMID: 17908056.
43. Subramanian A., Tamayo P., Mootha V. K., Mukherjee S., Ebert B. L., Gillette M. A.. Gene
                    set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide
                    expression profiles.. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*. 2005;102:15545-15550. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102. PMID: 16199517.
44. Sui Y., Stehno-Bittel L., Li S., Loganathan R., Dhillon N. K., Pinson D.. CXCL10-induced
                    cell death in neurons: role of calcium dysregulation.. *Eur. J. Neurosci.*. 2006;23:957-964. DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.04631.x. PMID: 16519660.
45. Sutinen E. M., Pirttilä T., Anderson G., Salminen A., Ojala J. O.. Pro-inflammatory interleukin-18 increases
                    Alzheimer’s disease-associated amyloid-β production in human
                    neuron-like cells.. *J. Neuroinflam.*. 2012;9:1-14. DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-199. PMID: 22898493.
46. Szklarczyk D., Franceschini A., Wyder S., Forslund K., Heller D., Huerta-Cepas J.. STRING
                    v10: protein–protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of
                    life.. *Nucleic Acids Res.*. 2015;43:D447-D452. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1003. PMID: 25352553.
47. . R: a language and environment for statistical computing.. *Computing*. 2013;14:-.
48. Ventura H. T., Lopes P. S., Peloso J. V., Guimarães S. E., Carneiro A. P. S., Carneiro P. L.. A canonical correlation analysis of the
                    association between carcass and ham traits in pigs used to produce dry-cured
                    ham.. *Genet. Mol. Biol.*. 2011;34:415-455. DOI: 10.1590/S1415-47572011000300014. PMID: 21931518.
49. Weiner M. W., Veitch D. P.. Introduction to special issue: overview of
                    Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.. *Alzheimer’s Dement.*. 2015;11:730-733. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.007. PMID: 26194308.
