# The Impact of TSC-1 and -2 Mutations on Response to Therapy in
                    Malignant PEComa: A Multicenter Retrospective Analysis

**Authors:** Lawrence Liu, Carina Dehner, Nikhil Grandhi, Yang Lyu, Dana C. Borcherding, John S. A. Chrisinger, Xiao Zhang, Jingqin Luo, Yu Tao, Amanda Parkes, Nam Q. Bui, Elizabeth J. Davis, Mohammed M. Milhem, Varun Monga, Mia Weiss, Brian Van Tine, Angela C. Hirbe, Italia Di Liegro

**Article IDs:**
- Pmid: 36360169
- Pmc: PMC9689779
- Doi: 10.3390/genes13111932
- Publisher-id: genes-13-01932

**Categories:**
- Article

**Publication Dates:**
- Epub: 24-10-2022
- Collection: 11-2022

## Abstract

## 1. Introduction

Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasms (PEComas) are mesenchymal tumors with
                myomelanocytic differentiation. This family of neoplasms consists of renal
                angiomyolipoma (RAL), lymphangiomyomatosis (LAM), clear cell “sugar”
                tumors, hepatic angiomyolipoma, PEComa not otherwise specified (PEComa-NOS), and
                others [1,2,3,4,5]. There are only 40–80
                cases per year in the United States. In the literature, median overall survival
                (mOS) is typically 60 months [5].
                Women are disproportionately affected by PEComas (70%), with a median age of
                presentation of 46 years and a range from 15–100 years [6]. While some PEComa cases are
                associated with tuberous sclerosis (TS), 80% of cases are sporadic. RALs occur in
                80% of patients with tuberous sclerosis, while LAM occurs in 30% of women with TS [1,4,7,8]. These tumors can appear
                almost anywhere anatomically, and there is not a common symptom or sign associated
                with this neoplasm. For RALs, roughly a quarter of patients may experience flank
                pain, and 5% experience hematuria, but the majority will be asymptomatic and
                detected incidentally by imaging [1
                ,2,4,9]. Histologically, their appearance can vary from having
                epithelioid features to spindle cells, and some tumors have even been found to
                express melanin [1,2,3,4].
                The diagnosis is made by observation of combined smooth muscle and melanocytic
                differentiation, supported by positive staining for Melan A, HMB-45, MITF, and SMA.
                A subset is positive for TFE3. Occasionally, these tumors will show positivity for
                S100 protein, caldesmon, desmin, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor [1,3,4
                ].

The majority of PEComas have a loss of function (LOF) of TSC-1
                or -2 genes (commonly TSC-2
                LOF), leading to increased mTOR pathway activation. Therefore, TS patients are most
                predisposed to PEComa family tumors. A minority of tumors harbor rearrangements of
                the TFE3 (Xp11) gene locus, which leads to downstream
                activation of mTOR and other cancer promoting pathways [1,3,4,9,10,11
                ,12,13].

Management involves surgery, radiation, and/or systemic therapy, depending on the
                tumor type, location, invasion, and spread [4,7,10,12,13,14] Given that the vast majority
                of PEComas are driven by mTOR hyper-activation, the widely agreed upon systemic
                therapy is mTOR inhibition via everolimus, sirolimus, or temsirolimus [7]. Bissler et al. performed a
                randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial evaluating everolimus in patients
                with RAL associated with TS or sporadic LAM [7,8].
                Significant activity was observed, with a 54% overall response rate (ORR) at roughly
                29 months [7]. Follow-up of
                these patients found that for those who had a response to everolimus, tumor growth
                was observed after cessation of therapy [8]. Additionally, randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
                utilizing sirolimus in RAL and LAM showed very similar results and ORRs
                (40–50%) [15,16,17]. These studies of everolimus
                and sirolimus along with numerous case reports demonstrate a very good safety
                profile of mTOR inhibition with relatively low rates of adverse events [4,7,9,10,11,13,15]. The recent AMPECT trial
                investigated the efficacy and safety profile of ABI-009, albumin-bound sirolimus, in
                the treatment of malignant PEComa and demonstrated an ORR of 39%, median
                progression-free survival (mPFS) of 10.6 months, and a mOS of 40.6 months [13]. A study by Sanfilippo et
                al. reported the efficacy of various systemic therapies against PEComas: gemcitabine
                (ORR 20%, with mPFS of 3.4 months), anthracyclines (ORR 13%, with mPFS of 3.2
                months), and antiangiogenic agents (ORR 8.3%, with mPFS of 5.4 months); mTOR
                inhibition was still shown to be the most effective (ORR of 41%, with a mPFS of 9
                months) [14]. However, a large
                genomic analysis of these tumors has not been performed. Thus, it is unclear what
                other genomic alterations may exist in these tumors and how they influence the
                response to first-line mTOR inhibition.

## 2. Materials and Methods

We conducted a retrospective analysis to identify PEComa patients with
                next-generation sequencing (NGS) data and compared outcomes based on mutations. This
                was a multicenter study conducted at five sites within the US: Washington University
                in St. Louis, the University of Wisconsin, the University of Iowa, Stanford
                University, and Vanderbilt University. The data was collected from surgical
                pathology reports from 1 January 2004 to 31 January 2021. Forty-nine patients with
                surgical pathology reports and chart data were identified across the participating
                sites.

Data from pathology reports were collected and stored in the RedCap database.
                Malignant PEComa was defined as pathology demonstrating two or more of the
                following: primary tumor > 5 cm, infiltrative, high nuclear grade and
                cellularity, mitotic rate ≥ 1/50 high power field, necrosis, vascular
                invasion [18]. In addition to
                collecting data on malignant criteria, we also collected data on mutational data
                from NGS, surgery, radiation therapy, systemic therapy, response, metastatic
                disease, time to progression after each treatment line, and survival time. A flow
                chart demonstrating patient accrual is included in the supplementary materials. A table
                with pathology information of each patient was included in the supplementary materials.

Progression-free survival (PFS) was defined as the date of diagnosis to date of
                progression or death or last imaging scan. Overall survival (OS) was defined as the
                date of diagnosis to date of death or last follow-up. PFS and OS were thresholded at
                12 and 50 months, respectively. ORR was defined as partial response (PR) or complete
                response (CR). Clinical benefit rate (CBR) was defined as stable disease, PR, or CR.
                GraphPad Prism 9.1.1 software sourced from Washington University in St. Louis, MO,
                US was used for statistical analyses. Empirical survival probability was estimated
                via Kaplan–Meier method and differences estimated via log-rank test.

## 3. Results

The patient population was primarily female (72%), and tumor type was mostly PEComas
                other than RAL (68%). Primary tumor location was largely uterine (24%) or
                retroperitoneal/kidney (26%). The majority of patients were treated with surgical
                resection initially (94%), and 32% experienced local recurrence (Table 1). For TSC-1 or TSC-2 mutated
                PEComa treated with mTOR inhibition as first-line therapy, the ORR was 25% and CBR
                was 75% compared to 33% and 66%, respectively, for PEComa without the TSC-1 or -2 mutations also
                treated with mTOR inhibition (Table
                2). There was a non-statistically significant trend towards improved OS in TSC-2 mutated PEComa vs. TSC-1
                (Figure 1). Patients with TSC-1 or -2 mutated tumors
                had an initial trend towards improved OS compared other mutations, which disappeared
                at 50 months (Figure 2).
                Patients treated with first-line mTOR inhibition (regardless of mutational status)
                versus other systemic therapy had an initial trend towards improved PFS, which
                disappeared at 12 months (Figure 3
                ).

## 4. Discussion

Although there are only 40–80 cases of PEComa per year, they are associated
                with a median OS of 60 months [1
                ,2,3,4,5].
                Additionally, 80% of TS patients develop RALs, and while most are benign, there is a
                risk of malignant transformation. Thus far, upfront mTOR inhibition has provided the
                best results, with the AMPECT trial recently reporting an ORR of 39%, a mPFS of 10.6
                months, and a mOS of 40.6 months [13].
                However, it is unclear what other genomic alterations may exist in these tumors and
                how they influence the response to first-line mTOR inhibition.

We sought to identify any differences in survival and progression between TSC-1 or -2 mutation versus
                other mutations. First, we demonstrated that there was no statistically significant
                difference in survival based on TSC-1 versus TSC-2 mutational status. There were only two patients with TSC-1 mutations, which limits our ability to see a
                difference in response rates between TSC-1 and TSC-2. Second, there was no significant difference in
                survival for TSC-1 or TSC-2
                compared to other mutations. Our ORR for first-line mTOR inhibition (25% in TSC-1 or TSC-2 and 33.3% in
                other mutations) was lower in comparison to that of the AMPECT trial (39%) [13]. This suggests that there is
                a benefit to nab-sirolimus over the oral mTOR inhibitors, potentially due to the
                fact that the oral drugs can have variable absorption and incomplete target
                suppression. There were six patients with TSC-1 and TSC-2 mutations that were treated with other systemic
                therapies in the first-line setting. It is possible that exclusion of these patients
                led to worse ORR. Third, we did not find a significant difference in PFS1 with mTORi
                versus other therapy. However, most patients received mTOR inhibition and there were
                too few patients who received chemotherapy or immunotherapy first line for us to
                make any statistically significant conclusions.

The limitations of our study include the retrospective nature and the small sample
                size. Additionally, whole-exome sequencing was utilized as opposed to whole-genome
                sequencing, so intronic splice mutations or copy number changes would not have been
                detected. Future studies should seek to identify other drivers or mechanisms of TSC-1/-2 silencing that could predict response to therapy.
                Additionally, the identification of TFE3 translocations may be crucial as predictors
                of the theoretical ineffectiveness of mTOR inhibition [19]. Additionally, novel
                mutations could be drivers of this rare cancer, as demonstrated in this presentation
                of cutaneous PEComa [20].
                Identification of such mutations could provide targets for future therapies. Our
                understanding of the behavior and biology of rare cancers such as PEComa is possible
                with collaborations within sarcoma centers.

## Tables

**Table 1**

*Baseline characteristics. * Some cases had multiple mutations.*

| Patient Characteristics |  |
| :---: | :---: |
| \nSex
                            \n | \n |
| Male | 14 (28) |
| Female | 36 (72) |
| \nAge at
                            Diagnosis (years)\n | 54
                            (31–78) * |
| \nTumor
                            Subtype\n | \n |
| Angiomyolipoma | 11 (22) |
| PEComa | 34 (68) |
| \nPrimary
                            Tumor Location\n | \n |
| GI Tract | 9 (18) |
| Soft Tissue | 5 (10) |
| Liver | 1 (2) |
| Kidney/Retroperitoneum | 13 (26) |
| Uterus | 12 (24) |
| Unknown | 9 (20) |
| \nMetastases
                            at Presentation\n | 5 (10) |
| \nLocal
                            Recurrence\n | 16 (32) |
| \nGrade
                            \n | \n |
| High | 18 (36) |
| Low | 1 (2) |
| Malignant PEComa | 27 (55) |
| \nSurgical
                            Resection\n | 47 (94) |
| \nTreated
                            with Systemic Therapy\n | 22 (44) |
| \nMutational
                            Status Known *\n | 20 (40) |
| \nTSC-1\n | 2 (4) |
| \nTSC-2\n | 12 (24) |
|  | 9 (18) |
|  | 9 (18) |
|  | 3 (6) |
**Table 2**

*Overall response rate and clinical benefit rate.*

| Mutation | First-Line Therapy |  | ORR (%) | CBR (%) |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| \nTSC-1
                            or -2\n | mTORi | 8 | 25 | 75 |
| Anthracycline | 0 | \n | \n |
| Other | 1 * | 100 | 100 |
| Other | mTORi | 6 | 33.3 | 66.7 |
| Anthracycline | 0 | \n | \n |
| Other | 3 ** | 0 | 66.7 |

**Keywords:**
PEComa, angiomyolipoma, lymphangiomyomatosis, mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, sirolimus, temsirolimus

**Copyright:** © 2022 by the authors.

## References

1. Haiges D., Kurz P., Laaff H., Meiss F., Kutzner H., Technau-Hafsi K.. Malignant PEComa. *J. Cutan. Pathol.*. 2018;45:84-89. DOI: 10.1111/cup.13061
2. Huľová S., Syčová-Milá Z., Macák D., Janega P., Chovanec M., Mardiak J., Mego M.. Diagnostic Challenges and Extraordinary Treatment Response in
                        Rare Malignant PEComa Tumor of the Kidney. *Klin. Onkol.*. 2018;31:448-452. DOI: 10.14735/amko2018448
3. Thway K., Fisher C.. PEComa: Morphology and genetics of a complex tumor family. *Ann. Diagn. Pathol.*. 2015;19:359-368. DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.06.003
4. Utpatel K., Calvisi D.F., Köhler G., Kühnel T., Niesel A., Verloh N., Vogelhuber M., Neu R., Hosten N., Schildhaus H.-U.. Complexity of PEComas: Diagnostic approach, molecular background,
                        clinical management. *Pathologe*. 2019;41:9-19. DOI: 10.1007/s00292-019-0612-5
5. Bourgmayer A., Nannini S., Bonjean P., Kurtz J.-E., Malouf G.G., Gantzer J.. Natural History and Treatment Strategies of Advanced PEComas: A
                        Systematic Review. *Cancers*. 2021;13:-. DOI: 10.3390/cancers13205227
6. Shankar V.. Perivascular Epithelioid Cell. **. 2019;:-. DOI: 
7. Bissler J.J., Kingswood J.C., Radzikowska E., Zonnenberg B.A., Frost M., Belousova E., Sauter M., Nonomura N., Brakemeier S., de Vries P.J.. Everolimus for renal angiomyolipoma in patients with tuberous
                        sclerosis complex or sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis: Extension of a
                        randomized controlled trial. *Nephrol. Dial. Transplant.*. 2016;31:111-119. DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfv249
8. Bissler J.J., Nonomura N., Budde K., Zonnenberg B.A., Fischereder M., Voi M., Louveau A.-L., Herbst F., Bebin E.M., Curatolo P.. Angiomyolipoma rebound tumor growth after discontinuation of
                        everolimus in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex or sporadic
                        lymphangioleiomyomatosis. *PLoS ONE*. 2018;13:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201005
9. Rutkowski P.L., Mullen J.T.. Management of the “Other” retroperitoneal
                        sarcomas. *J. Surg. Oncol.*. 2018;117:79-86. DOI: 10.1002/jso.24893
10. Benson C., Vitfell-Rasmussen J., Maruzzo M., Fisher C., Tunariu N., Mitchell S., Al-Muderis O., Thway K., Larkin J., Judson I.. A retrospective study of patients with malignant PEComa receiving
                        treatment with sirolimus or temsirolimus: The Royal Marsden Hospital
                        experience. *Anticancer Res.*. 2014;34:3663-3668. DOI: 
11. Bleeker J.S., Quevedo J.F., Folpe A.L.. “Malignant” Perivascular Epithelioid Cell
                        Neoplasm: Risk Stratification and Treatment Strategies. *Sarcoma*. 2012;2012:12-. DOI: 10.1155/2012/541626
12. Italiano A., Delcambre C., Hostein I., Cazeau A.L., Marty M., Avril A., Coindre J.-M., Bui B.. Treatment with the mTOR inhibitor temsirolimus in patients with
                        malignant PEComa. *Ann. Oncol.*. 2010;21:1135-1137. DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdq044
13. Wagner A.J., Ravi V., Riedel R.F., Ganjoo K., Van Tine B.A., Chugh R., Cranmer L., Gordon E.M., Hornick J.L., Du H.. nab-Sirolimus for Patients with Malignant Perivascular
                        Epithelioid Cell Tumors. *J. Clin. Oncol. Off. J. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol.*. 2021;39:3660-3670. DOI: 10.1200/JCO.21.01728
14. Sanfilippo R., Jones R.L., Blay J.-Y., Le Cesne A., Provenzano S., Antoniou G., Mir O., Fucà G., Fumagalli E., Bertulli R.. Role of Chemotherapy, VEGFR Inhibitors, and mTOR Inhibitors in
                        Advanced Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Tumors (PEComas). *Clin. Cancer Res.*. 2019;25:5295-5300. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-0288
15. Dabora S.L., Franz D.N., Ashwal S., Sagalowsky A., DiMario F.J., Miles D., Cutler D., Krueger D., Uppot R.N., Rabenou R.. Multicenter phase 2 trial of sirolimus for tuberous sclerosis:
                        Kidney angiomyolipomas and other tumors regress and VEGF-D levels decrease. *PLoS ONE*. 2011;6:-. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023379
16. Davies D.M., de Vries P.J., Johnson S.R., McCartney D.L., Cox J.A., Serra A.L., Watson P.C., Howe C.J., Doyle T., Pointon K.. Sirolimus therapy for angiomyolipoma in tuberous sclerosis and
                        sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis: A phase 2 trial. *Clin. Cancer Res.*. 2011;17:4071-4081. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0445
17. McCormack F.X., Inoue Y., Moss J., Singer L.G., Strange C., Nakata K., Barker A.F., Chapman J.T., Brantly M.L., Stocks J.M.. Efficacy and safety of sirolimus in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. *N. Engl. J. Med.*. 2011;364:1595-1606. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1100391
18. Folpe A.L., Mentzel T., Lehr H.-A., Fisher C., Balzer B.L., Weiss S.W.. Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasms of soft tissue and
                        gynecologic origin: A clinicopathologic study of 26 cases and review of the
                        literature. *Am. J. Surg. Pathol.*. 2005;29:1558-1575. DOI: 10.1097/01.pas.0000173232.22117.37
19. Schoolmeester J.K., Dao L.N., Sukov W.R., Wang L., Park K.J., Murali R., Hameed M.R., Soslow R.A.. TFE3 translocation-associated perivascular epithelioid cell
                        neoplasm (PEComa) of the gynecologic tract: Morphology, immunophenotype,
                        differential diagnosis. *Am. J. Surg. Pathol.*. 2015;39:394-404. DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000349
20. Cazzato G., Colagrande A., Lospalluti L., Pacello L., Lettini T., Arezzo F., Loizzi V., Lupo C., Casatta N., Cormio G.. Primitive Cutaneous (P)erivascular (E)pithelioid (C)ell Tumour
                        (PEComa): A New Case Report of a Rare Cutaneous Tumor. *Genes*. 2022;13:-. DOI: 10.3390/genes13071153
